One fine morning in the full London season, Major Arthur Pendennis came
over from his lodgings, according to his custom, to breakfast at a
certain Club in Pall Mall, of which he was a chief ornament. As he was
one of the finest judges of wine in England, and a man of active,
dominating, and inquiring spirit, he had been very properly chosen to be
a member of the Committee of this Club, and indeed was almost the manager
of the institution; and the stewards and waiters bowed before him as
reverentially as to a Duke or a Field-Marshal.
At a quarter past ten the Major invariably made his appearance in the
best blacked boots in all London, with a checked morning cravat that
never was rumpled until dinner time, a buff waistcoat which bore the
crown of his sovereign on the buttons, and linen so spotless that Mr.
Brummel himself asked the name of his laundress, and would probably have
employed her had not misfortunes compelled that great man to fly the
country. Pendennis’s coat, his white gloves, his whiskers, his very cane,
were perfect of their kind as specimens of the costume of a military man
en retraite. At a distance, or seeing his back merely, you would have
taken him to be not more than thirty years old: it was only by a nearer
inspection that you saw the factitious nature of his rich brown hair, and
that there were a few crow’s-feet round about the somewhat faded eyes ofhis handsome mottled face. His nose was of the Wellington pattern. His
hands and wristbands were beautifully long and white. On the latter he
wore handsome gold buttons given to him by his Royal Highness the Duke of
York, and on the others more than one elegant ring, the chief and largest
of them being emblazoned with the famous arms of Pendennis.
He always took possession of the same table in the same corner of the
room, from which nobody ever now thought of ousting him. One or two mad
wags and wild fellows had in former days, and in freak or bravado,
endeavoured twice or thrice to deprive him of this place; but there was a
quiet dignity in the Major’s manner as he took his seat at the next
table, and surveyed the interlopers, which rendered it impossible for any
man to sit and breakfast under his eye; and that table--by the fire, and
yet near the window--became his own. His letters were laid out there in
expectation of his arrival, and many was the young fellow about town who
looked with wonder at the number of those notes, and at the seals and
franks which they bore. If there was any question about etiquette,
society, who was married to whom, of what age such and such a duke was,
Pendennis was the man to whom every one appealed. Marchionesses used to
drive up to the Club, and leave notes for him, or fetch him out. He was
perfectly affable. The young men liked to walk with him in the Park or
down Pall Mall; for he touched his hat to everybody, and every other man
he met was a lord.
The Major sate down at his accustomed table then, and while the waiters
went to bring him his toast and his hot newspaper, he surveyed his
letters through his gold double eye-glass. He carried it so gaily, you
would hardly have known it was spectacles in disguise, and examined one
pretty note after another, and laid them by in order. There were large
solemn dinner cards, suggestive of three courses and heavy conversation;
there were neat little confidential notes, conveying female entreaties;
there was a note on thick official paper from the Marquis of Steyne,
telling him to come to Richmond to a little party at the Star and Garter,
and speak French, which language the Major possessed very perfectly; and
another from the Bishop of Ealing and Mrs. Trail, requesting the honour
of Major Pendennis’s company at Ealing House, all of which letters
Pendennis read gracefully, and with the more satisfaction, because
Glowry, the Scotch surgeon, breakfasting opposite to him, was looking on,
and hating him for having so many invitations, which nobody ever sent to
Glowry.
These perused, the Major took out his pocket-book to see on what days he
was disengaged, and which of these many hospitable calls he could afford
to accept or decline.
He threw over Cutler, the East India Director, in Baker Street, in order
to dine with Lord Steyne and the little French party at the Star and
Garter--the Bishop he accepted, because, though the dinner was slow, he
liked to dine with bishops--and so went through his list and disposed of
them according to his fancy or interest. Then he took his breakfast and
looked over the paper, the gazette, the births and deaths, and the
fashionable intelligence, to see that his name was down among the guests
at my Lord So-and-so’s fete, and in the intervals of these occupationscarried on cheerful conversation with his acquaintances about the room.
Among the letters which formed Major Pendennis’s budget for that morning
there was only one unread, and which lay solitary and apart from all the
fashionable London letters, with a country postmark and a homely seal.
The superscription was in a pretty delicate female hand, and though
marked ’Immediate’ by the fair writer, with a strong dash of anxiety
under the word, yet the Major had, for reasons of his own, neglected up
to the present moment his humble rural petitioner, who to be sure could
hardly hope to get a hearing among so many grand folks who attended his
levee. The fact was, this was a letter from a female relative of
Pendennis, and while the grandees of her brother’s acquaintance were
received and got their interview, and drove off, as it were, the patient
country letter remained for a long time waiting for an audience in the
ante-chamber under the slop-bason.
At last it came to be this letter’s turn, and the Major broke a seal with
’Fairoaks’ engraved upon it, and ’Clavering St. Mary’s’ for a postmark.
It was a double letter, and the Major commenced perusing the envelope
before he attacked the inner epistle.
"Is it a letter from another Jook," growled Mr. Glowry, inwardly,
"Pendennis would not be leaving that to the last, I’m thinking."
"My dear Major Pendennis," the letter ran, "I beg and implore you to come
to me immediately "--very likely, thought Pendennis, and Steyne’s dinner
to-day--"I am in the very greatest grief and perplexity. My dearest boy,
who has been hitherto everything the fondest mother could wish, is
grieving me dreadfully. He has formed--I can hardly write it--a passion,
an infatuation,"--the Major grinned--"for an actress who has been
performing here. She is at least twelve years older than Arthur--who will
not be eighteen till next February--and the wretched boy insists upon
marrying her."
"Hay! What’s making Pendennis swear now?"--Mr. Glowry asked of himself,
for rage and wonder were concentrated in the Major’s open mouth, as he
read this astounding announcement.
"Do, my dear friend," the grief-stricken lady went on, "come to me
instantly on the receipt of this; and, as Arthur’s guardian, entreat,
command, the wretched child to give up this most deplorable resolution."
And, after more entreaties to the above effect, the writer concluded by
signing herself the Major’s ’unhappy affectionate sister, Helen
Pendennis.’
"Fairoaks, Tuesday"--the Major concluded, reading the last words of the
letter--"A d---d pretty business at Fairoaks, Tuesday; now let us see
what the boy has to say;" and he took the other letter, which was written
in a great floundering boy’s hand, and sealed with the large signet of
the Pendennises, even larger than the Major’s own, and with supplementary
wax sputtered all round the seal, in token of the writer’s tremulousness
and agitation.The epistle ran thus:
"Fairoaks, Monday, Midnight.
"My Dear Uncle,--In informing you of my engagement with Miss Costigan,
daughter of J. Chesterfield Costigan, Esq., of Costiganstown, but,
perhaps, better known to you under her professional name of Miss
Fotheringay, of the Theatres Royal Drury Lane and Crow Street, and of the
Norwich and Welsh Circuit, I am aware that I make an announcement which
cannot, according to the present prejudices of society at least, be
welcome to my family. My dearest mother, on whom, God knows, I would wish
to inflict no needless pain, is deeply moved and grieved, I am sorry to
say, by the intelligence which I have this night conveyed to her. I
beseech you, my dear Sir, to come down and reason with her and console
her. Although obliged by poverty to earn an honourable maintenance by the
exercise of her splendid talents, Miss Costigan’s family is as ancient
and noble as our own. When our ancestor, Ralph Pendennis, landed with
Richard II. in Ireland, my Emily’s forefathers were kings of that
country. I have the information from Mr. Costigan, who, like yourself, is
a military man.
"It is in vain I have attempted to argue with my dear mother, and prove
to her that a young lady of irreproachable character and lineage, endowed
with the most splendid gifts of beauty and genius, who devotes herself to
the exercise of one of the noblest professions, for the sacred purpose of
maintaining her family, is a being whom we should all love and reverence,
rather than avoid;--my poor mother has prejudices which it is impossible
for my logic to overcome, and refuses to welcome to her arms one who is
disposed to be her most affectionate daughter through life.
"Although Miss Costigan is some years older than myself, that
circumstance does not operate as a barrier to my affection, and I am sure
will not influence its duration. A love like mine, Sir, I feel, is
contracted once and for ever. As I never had dreamed of love until I saw
her--I feel now that I shall die without ever knowing another passion. It
is the fate of my life. It was Miss C.’s own delicacy which suggested
that the difference of age, which I never felt, might operate as a bar to
our union. But having loved once, I should despise myself, and be
unworthy of my name as a gentleman, if I hesitated to abide by my
passion: if I did not give all where I felt all, and endow the woman who
loves me fondly with my whole heart and my whole fortune.
"I press for a speedy marriage with my Emily--for why, in truth, should
it be delayed? A delay implies a doubt, which I cast from me as unworthy.
It is impossible that my sentiments can change towards Emily--that at any
age she can be anything but the sole object of my love. Why, then, wait?
I entreat you, my dear Uncle, to come down and reconcile my dear mother
to our union, and I address you as a man of the world, qui mores hominum
multorum vidit et urbes, who will not feel any of the weak scruples and
fears which agitate a lady who has scarcely ever left her village.
"Pray, come down to us immediately. I am quite confident that--apart from
considerations of fortune--you will admire and approve of my Emily.--Youraffectionate Nephew, Arthur Pendennis, Jr."
When the Major had concluded the perusal of this letter, his countenance
assumed an expression of such rage and horror that Glowry, the
surgeon-official, felt in his pocket for his lancet, which he always
carried in his card-case, and thought his respected friend was going into
a fit. The intelligence was indeed sufficient to agitate Pendennis. The
head of the Pendennises going to marry an actress ten years his senior,--
a headstrong boy going to plunge into matrimony. "The mother has spoiled
the young rascal," groaned the Major inwardly, "with her cursed
sentimentality and romantic rubbish. My nephew marry a tragedy queen!
Gracious mercy, people will laugh at me so that I shall not dare show my
head!" And he thought with an inexpressible pang that he must give up
Lord Steyne’s dinner at Richmond, and must lose his rest and pass the
night in an abominable tight mail-coach, instead of taking pleasure, as
he had promised himself, in some of the most agreeable and select society
in England.
And he must not only give up this but all other engagements for some time
to come. Who knows how long the business might detain him. He quitted his
breakfast table for the adjoining writing-room, and there ruefully wrote
off refusals to the Marquis, the Earl, the Bishop, and all his
entertainers; and he ordered his servant to take places in the mail-coach
for that evening, of course charging the sum which he disbursed for the
seats to the account of the widow and the young scapegrace of whom he was
guardian.
CHAPTER II
A Pedigree and other Family Matters
Early in the Regency of George the Magnificent, there lived in a small
town in the west of England, called Clavering, a gentleman whose name was
Pendennis. There were those alive who remembered having seen his name
painted on a board, which was surmounted by a gilt pestle and mortar over
the door of a very humble little shop in the city of Bath, where Mr.
Pendennis exercised the profession of apothecary and surgeon; and where
he not only attended gentlemen in their sick-rooms, and ladies at the
most interesting periods of their lives, but would condescend to sell a
brown-paper plaster to a farmer’s wife across the counter,--or to vend
tooth-brushes, hair-powder, and London perfumery. For these facts a few
folks at Clavering could vouch, where people’s memories were more
tenacious, perhaps, than they are in a great bustling metropolis.
And yet that little apothecary who sold a stray customer a pennyworth of
salts, or a more fragrant cake of Windsor soap, was a gentleman of good
education, and of as old a family as any in the whole county of Somerset.
He had a Cornish pedigree which carried the Pendennises up to the time of
the Druids, and who knows how much farther back? They had intermarriedwith the Normans at a very late period of their family existence, and
they were related to all the great families of Wales and Brittany.
Pendennis had had a piece of University education too, and might have
pursued that career with great honour, but that in his second year at
Cambridge his father died insolvent, and poor Pen was obliged to betake
himself to the pestle and apron. He always detested the trade, and it was
only necessity, and the offer of his mother’s brother, a London
apothecary of low family, into which Pendennis’s father had demeaned
himself by marrying, that forced John Pendennis into so odious a calling.
He quickly after his apprenticeship parted from the coarse-minded
practitioner his relative, and set up for himself at Bath with his modest
medical ensign. He had for some time a hard struggle with poverty; and it
was all he could do to keep the shop and its gilt ornaments in decent
repair, and his bed-ridden mother in comfort: but Lady Ribstone happening
to be passing to the Rooms with an intoxicated Irish chairman who bumped
her ladyship up against Pen’s very door-post, and drove his chair-pole
through the handsomest pink bottle in the surgeon’s window, alighted
screaming from her vehicle, and was accommodated with a chair in Mr.
Pendennis’s shop, where she was brought round with cinnamon and
sal-volatile.
Mr. Pendennis’s manners were so uncommonly gentlemanlike and soothing,
that her ladyship, the wife of Sir Pepin Ribstone, of Codlingbury, in the
county of Somerset, Bart., appointed her preserver, as she called him,
apothecary to her person and family, which was very large. Master
Ribstone coming home for the Christmas holidays from Eton, over-ate
himself and had a fever, in which Mr. Pendennis treated him with the
greatest skill and tenderness. In a word, he got the good graces of the
Codlingbury family, and from that day began to prosper. The good company
of Bath patronised him, and amongst the ladies especially he was beloved
and admired. First his humble little shop became a smart one: then he
discarded the selling of tooth-brushes and perfumery, as unworthy of a
gentleman of an ancient lineage: then he shut up the shop altogether, and
only had a little surgery attended by a genteel young man: then he had a
gig with a man to drive him; and, before her exit from this world, his
poor old mother had the happiness of seeing from her bedroom window to
which her chair was rolled, her beloved John step into a close carriage
of his own, a one-horse carriage it is true, but with the arms of the
family of Pendennis handsomely emblazoned on the panels. "What would
Arthur say now?" she asked, speaking of a younger son of hers--"who never
so much as once came to see my dearest Johnny through all the time of his
poverty and struggles!"
"Captain Pendennis is with his regiment in India, mother," Mr. Pendennis
remarked, "and, if you please, I wish you would not call me Johnny before
the young man--before Mr. Parkins."
Presently the day came when she ceased to call her son by the name of
Johnny, or by any other title of endearment or affection; and his house
was very lonely without that kind though querulous voice. He had his
night-bell altered and placed in the room in which the good old lady had
grumbled for many a long year, and he slept in the great large bed there.He was upwards of forty years old when these events befell; before the
war was over; before George the Magnificent came to the throne; before
this history indeed: but what is a gentleman without his pedigree?
Pendennis, by this time, had his handsomely framed and glazed, and
hanging up in his drawing-room between the pictures of Codlingbury House
in Somersetshire, and St. Boniface’s College, Cambridge, where he had
passed the brief and happy days of his early manhood. As for the pedigree
he had taken it out of a trunk, as Sterne’s officer called for his sword,
now that he was a gentleman and could show it.
About the time of Mrs. Pendennis’s demise, another of her son’s patients
likewise died at Bath; that virtuous woman, old Lady Pontypool,
daughter of Reginald twelfth Earl of Bareacres, and by consequence
great-grand-aunt to the present Earl, and widow of John second Lord
Pontypool, and likewise of the Reverend Jonas Wales, of the Armageddon
Chapel, Clifton. For the last five years of her life her ladyship had
been attended by Miss Helen Thistlewood, a very distant relative of the
noble house of Bareacres, before mentioned, and daughter of Lieutenant R.
Thistlewood, R.N., killed at the battle of Copenhagen. Under Lady
Pontypool’s roof Miss Thistlewood found a comfortable shelter, as far as
boarding and lodging went, but suffered under such an infernal tyranny as
only women can inflict on, or bear from, one another: the Doctor, who
paid his visits to my Lady Pontypool at least twice a day, could not but
remark the angelical sweetness and kindness with which the young lady
bore her elderly relative’s insults; and it was, as they were going in
the fourth mourning coach to attend her ladyship’s venerated remains to
Bath Abbey, where they now repose, that he looked at her sweet pale face
and resolved upon putting a certain question to her, the very nature of
which made his pulse beat ninety, at least.
He was older than she by more than twenty years, and at no time the most
ardent of men. Perhaps he had had a love affair in early life which he
had to strangle--perhaps all early love affairs ought to be strangled or
drowned, like so many blind kittens: well, at three-and-forty he was a
collected quiet little gentleman in black stockings with a bald head, and
a few days after the ceremony he called to see her, and, as he felt her
pulse, he kept hold of her hand in his, and asked her where she was going
to live now that the Pontypool family had come down upon the property,
which was being nailed into boxes, and packed into hampers, and swaddled
up with haybands, and buried in straw, and locked under three keys in
green baize plate-chests, and carted away under the eyes of poor Miss
Helen,--he asked her where she was going to live finally.
Her eyes filled with tears, and she said she did not know. She had a
little money. The old lady had left her a thousand pounds, indeed; and
she would go into a boarding-house or into a school: in fine, she did not
know where.
Then Pendennis, looking into her pale face, and keeping hold of her cold
little hand, asked her if she would come and live with him? He was old
compared to--to so blooming a young lady as Miss Thistlewood (Pendennis
was of the grave old complimentary school of gentlemen and apothecaries),
but he was of good birth, and, he flattered himself, of good principlesand temper. His prospects were good, and daily mending. He was alone in
the world, and had need of a kind and constant companion, whom it would
be the study of his life to make happy; in a word, he recited to her a
little speech, which he had composed that morning in bed, and rehearsed
and perfected in his carriage, as he was coming to wait upon the young
lady.
Perhaps if he had had an early love-passage, she too had one day hoped
for a different lot than to be wedded to a little gentleman who rapped
his teeth and smiled artificially, who was laboriously polite to the
butler as he slid upstairs into the drawing-room, and profusely civil to
the lady’s-maid, who waited at the bed-room door; for whom her old
patroness used to ring as for a servant, and who came with even more
eagerness; who got up stories, as he sent in draughts, for his patient’s
amusement and his own profit: perhaps she would have chosen a different
man--but she knew, on the other hand, how worthy Pendennis was, how
prudent, how honourable; how good he had been to his mother, and constant
in his care of her; and the upshot of this interview was, that she,
blushing very much, made Pendennis an extremely low curtsey, and asked
leave to--to consider his very kind proposal.
They were married in the dull Bath season, which was the height of the
season in London. And Pendennis having previously, through a professional
friend, M.R.C.S., secured lodgings in Holles Street, Cavendish Square,
took his wife thither in a chaise and pair; conducted her to the
theatres, the Parks, and the Chapel Royal; showed her the folks going to
a drawing-room, and, in a word, gave her all the pleasures of the town.
He likewise left cards upon Lord Pontypool, upon the Right Honourable the
Earl of Bareacres, and upon Sir Pepin and Lady Ribstone, his earliest and
kindest patrons. Bareacres took no notice of the cards. Pontypool called,
admired Mrs. Pendennis, and said Lady Pontypool would come and see her,
which her ladyship did, per proxy of John her footman, who brought her
card, and an invitation to a concert five weeks off. Pendennis was back
in his little one-horse carriage, dispensing draughts and pills at that
time: but the Ribstones asked him and Mrs. Pendennis to an entertainment,
of which Mr. Pendennis bragged to the last day of his life.
The secret ambition of Mr. Pendennis had always been to be a gentleman.
It takes much time and careful saving for a provincial doctor, whose
gains are not very large, to lay by enough money wherewith to purchase a
house and land: but besides our friend’s own frugality and prudence,
fortune aided him considerably in his endeavour, and brought him to the
point which he so panted to attain. He laid out some money very
advantageously in the purchase of a house and small estate close upon the
village of Clavering before mentioned. Words cannot describe, nor did he
himself ever care to confess to any one, his pride when he found himself
a real landed proprietor, and could walk over acres of which he was the
master. A lucky purchase which he had made of shares in a copper-mine
added very considerably to his wealth, and he realised with great
prudence while this mine was still at its full vogue. Finally, he sold
his business at Bath, to Mr. Parkins, for a handsome sum of ready money,
and for an annuity to be paid to him during a certain number of years
after he had for ever retired from the handling of the mortar and pestle.Arthur Pendennis, his son, was eight years old at the time of this event,
so that it is no wonder that the latter, who left Bath and the surgery so
young, should forget the existence of such a place almost entirely, and
that his father’s hands had ever been dirtied by the compounding of
odious pills, or the preparation of filthy plasters. The old man never
spoke about the shop himself, never alluded to it; called in the medical
practitioner of Clavering to attend his family when occasion arrived;
sunk the black breeches and stockings altogether; attended market and
sessions, and wore a bottle-green coat and brass buttons with drab
gaiters, just as if he had been an English gentleman all his life. He
used to stand at his lodge-gate, and see the coaches come in, and bow
gravely to the guards and coachmen as they touched their hats and drove
by. It was he who founded the Clavering Book Club: and set up the
Samaritan Soup and Blanket Society. It was he who brought the mail, which
used to run through Cacklefield before, away from that village and
through Clavering. At church he was equally active as a vestryman and a
worshipper. At market every Thursday, he went from pen to stall, looked
at samples of oats, and munched corn, felt beasts, punched geese in the
breast, and weighed them with a knowing air, and did business with the
farmers at the Clavering Arms, as well as the oldest frequenter of that
house of call. It was now his shame, as it formerly was his pride, to be
called Doctor, and those who wished to please him always gave him the
title of Squire.
Heaven knows where they came from, but a whole range of Pendennis
portraits presently hung round the Doctor’s oak dining-room; Lelys and
Vandykes he vowed all the portraits to be, and when questioned as to the
history of the originals, would vaguely say they were ’ancestors of his.’
You could see by his wife’s looks that she disbelieved in these
genealogical legends, for she generally endeavoured to turn the
conversation when he commenced them. But his little boy believed them to
their fullest extent, and Roger Pendennis of Agincourt, Arthur Pendennis
of Crecy, General Pendennis of Blenheim and Oudenarde, were as real and
actual beings for this young gentleman as--whom shall we say?--as
Robinson Crusoe, or Peter Wilkins, or the Seven Champions of Christendom,
whose histories were in his library.
Pendennis’s fortune, which, at the best, was not above eight hundred
pounds a year, did not, with the best economy and management, permit of
his living with the great folks of the county; but he had a decent
comfortable society of the second-best sort. If they were not the roses,
they lived near the roses, as it were, and had a good deal of the odour
of genteel life. They had out their plate, and dined each other round in
the moonlight nights twice a year, coming a dozen miles to these
festivals; and besides the county, the Pendennises had the society of the
town of Clavering, as much as, nay, more than they liked: for Mrs. Pybus
was always poking about Helen’s conservatories, and intercepting the
operation of her soup-tickets and coal-clubs Captain Glanders (H. P.,
50th Dragoon Guards) was for ever swaggering about the Squire’s stables
and gardens, and endeavouring to enlist him in his quarrels with the
Vicar, with the Postmaster, with the Reverend F. Wapshot of Clavering
Grammar School, for overflogging his son, Anglesea Glanders,--with allthe village in fine. And Pendennis and his wife often blessed themselves,
that their house of Fairoaks was nearly a mile out of Clavering, or their
premises would never have been free from the prying eyes and prattle of
one or other of the male and female inhabitants there.
Fairoaks lawn comes down to the little river Brawl, and on the other side
were the plantations and woods (as much as were left of them) of
Clavering Park, Sir Francis Clavering, Bart. The park was let out in
pasture and fed down by sheep and cattle, when the Pendennises came first
to live at Fairoaks. Shutters were up in the house; a splendid freestone
palace, with great stairs, statues, and porticos, whereof you may see a
picture in the ’Beauties of England and Wales.’ Sir Richard Clavering,
Sir Francis’s-grandfather, had commenced the ruin of the family by the
building of this palace: his successor had achieved the ruin by living in
it. The present Sir Francis was abroad somewhere; nor could anybody be
found rich enough to rent that enormous mansion, through the deserted
rooms, mouldy clanking halls, and dismal galleries of which, Arthur
Pendennis many a time walked trembling when he was a boy. At sunset, from
the lawn of Fairoaks, there was a pretty sight: it and the opposite park
of Clavering were in the habit of putting on a rich golden tinge, which
became them both wonderfully. The upper windows of the great house flamed
so as to make your eyes wink; the little river ran off noisily westward,
and was lost in a sombre wood, behind which the towers of the old abbey
church of Clavering (whereby that town is called Clavering St. Mary’s to
the present day) rose up in purple splendour. Little Arthur’s figure and
his mother’s, cast long blue shadows over the grass; and he would repeat
in a low voice (for a scene of great natural beauty always moved the boy,
who inherited this sensibility from his mother) certain lines beginning,
"These are thy glorious works, Parent of Good; Almighty! thine this
universal frame," greatly to Mrs. Pendennis’s delight. Such walks and
conversation generally ended in a profusion of filial and maternal
embraces; for to love and to pray were the main occupations of this dear
woman’s life; and I have often heard Pendennis say in his wild way, that
he felt that he was sure of going to heaven, for his mother never could
be happy there without him.
As for John Pendennis, as the father of the family, and that sort of
thing, everybody had the greatest respect for him: and his orders were
obeyed like those of the Medes and Persians. His hat was as well brushed,
perhaps, as that of any man in this empire. His meals were served at the
same minute every day, and woe to those who came late, as little Pen, a
disorderly little rascal, sometimes did. Prayers were recited, his
letters were read, his business dispatched, his stables and garden
inspected, his hen-houses and kennel, his barn and pigstye visited,
always at regular hours. After dinner he always had a nap with the Globe
newspaper on his knee, and his yellow bandanna handkerchief on his face
(Major Pendennis sent the yellow handkerchiefs from India, and his
brother had helped in the purchase of his majority, so that they were
good friends now). And so, as his dinner took place at six o’clock to a
minute, and the sunset business alluded to may be supposed to have
occurred at about half-past seven, it is probable that he did not much
care for the view in front of his lawn windows or take any share in the
poetry and caresses which were taking place there.They seldom occurred in his presence. However frisky they were before,
mother and child were hushed and quiet when Mr. Pendennis walked into the
drawing-room, his newspaper under his arm. And here, while little Pen,
buried in a great chair, read all the books of which he could lay hold,
the Squire perused his own articles in the ’Gardener’s Gazette,’ or took
a solemn hand at picquet with Mrs. Pendennis, or an occasional friend
from the village.
Pendennis usually took care that at least one of his grand dinners should
take place when his brother, the Major, who, on the return of his
regiment from India and New South Wales, had sold out and gone upon
half-pay, came to pay his biennial visit to Fairoaks. "My brother, Major
Pendennis," was a constant theme of the retired Doctor’s conversation.
All the family delighted in my brother the Major. He was the link which
bound them to the great world of London, and the fashion. He always
brought down the last news of the nobility, and was in the constant habit
of dining with lords and great folks. He spoke of such with soldierlike
respect and decorum. He would say, "My Lord Bareacres has been good
enough to invite me to Bareacres for the pheasant shooting," or, "My Lord
Steyne is so kind as to wish for my presence at Stillbrook for the Easter
holidays;" and you may be sure the whereabouts of my brother the Major
was carefully made known by worthy Mr. Pendennis to his friends at the
Clavering Reading room, at Justice-meetings, or at the County-town. Their
carriages would come from ten miles round to call upon Major Pendennis in
his visits to Fairoaks; the fame of his fashion as a man about town was
established throughout the county. There was a talk of his marrying Miss
Hunkle, of Lilybank, old Hunkle the Attorney’s daughter, with at least
fifteen hundred a-year to her fortune: but my brother the Major refused
this negotiation, advantageous as it might seem to most persons. "As a
bachelor," he said, "nobody cares how poor I am. I have the happiness to
live with people who are so highly placed in the world, that a few
hundreds or thousands a year more or less can make no difference in the
estimation in which they are pleased to hold me. Miss Hunkle, though a
most respectable lady, is not in possession of either the birth or the
manners, which would entitle her to be received into the sphere in which
I have the honour to move. I shall live and die an old bachelor, John:
and your worthy friend, Miss Hunkle, I have no doubt, will find some more
worthy object of her affection, than a worn-out old soldier on half-pay."
Time showed the correctness of the surmise of the old man of the world;
Miss Hunkle married a young French nobleman, and is now at this moment
living at Lilybank, under the title of Baroness de Carambole, having been
separated from her wild young scapegrace of a Baron very shortly after
their union.
The Major was a great favourite with almost all the little establishment
of Fairoaks. He was as good-natured as he was well bred, and had a
sincere liking and regard for his sister-in-law, whom he pronounced, and
with perfect truth, to be as fine a lady as any in England, and an honour
to the family. Indeed, Mrs. Pendennis’s tranquil beauty, her natural
sweetness and kindness, and that simplicity and dignity which a perfect
purity and innocence are sure to bestow upon a handsome woman, rendered
her quite worthy of her brother’s praises. I think it is not nationalprejudice which makes me believe that a high-bred English lady is the
most complete of all Heaven’s subjects in this world. In whom else do you
see so much grace, and so much virtue; so much faith, and so much
tenderness; with such a perfect refinement and chastity? And by high-bred
ladies I don’t mean duchesses and countesses. Be they ever so high in
station, they can be but ladies, and no more. But almost every man who
lives in the world has the happiness, let us hope, of counting a few such
persons amongst his circle of acquaintance--women, in whose angelical
natures, there is something awful, as well as beautiful, to contemplate;
at whose feet the wildest and fiercest of us must fall down and humble
ourselves;--in admiration of that adorable purity which never seems to do
or to think wrong.
Arthur Pendennis had the good fortune to have a mother endowed with these
happy qualities. During his childhood and youth, the boy thought of her
as little less than an angel,--as a supernatural being, all wisdom, love,
and beauty. When her husband drove her into the county town, or to the
assize balls or concerts there, he would step into the assembly with his
wife on his arm, and look the great folks in the face, as much as to say,
"Look at that, my lord; can any of you show me a woman like that?" She
enraged some country ladies with three times her money, by a sort of
desperate perfection which they found in her. Miss Pybus said she was
cold and haughty; Miss Pierce, that she was too proud for her station;
Mrs. Wapshot, as a doctor of divinity’s lady, would have the pas of her,
who was only the wife of a medical practitioner. In the meanwhile, this
lady moved through the world quite regardless of all the comments that
were made in her praise or disfavour. She did not seem to know that she
was admired or hated for being so perfect: but carried on calmly through
life, saying her prayers, loving her family, helping her neighbours, and
doing her duty.
That even a woman should be faultless, however, is an arrangement not
permitted by nature, which assigns to us mental defects, as it awards to
us headaches, illnesses, or death; without which the scheme of the world
could not be carried on,--nay, some of the best qualities of mankind
could not be brought into exercise. As pain produces or elicits fortitude
and endurance; difficulty, perseverance; poverty, industry and ingenuity;
danger, courage and what not; so the very virtues, on the other hand,
will generate some vices: and, in fine, Mrs. Pendennis had that vice
which Miss Pybus and Miss Pierce discovered in her, namely, that of
pride; which did not vest itself so much in her own person, as in that of
her family. She spoke about Mr. Pendennis (a worthy little gentleman
enough, but there are others as good as he) with an awful reverence, as
if he had been the Pope of Rome on his throne, and she a cardinal
kneeling at his feet, and giving him incense. The Major she held to be a
sort of Bayard among Majors: and as for her son Arthur she worshipped
that youth with an ardour which the young scapegrace accepted almost as
coolly as the statue of the Saint in Saint Peter’s receives the rapturous
osculations which the faithful deliver on his toe.
This unfortunate superstition and idol-worship of this good woman was the
cause of a great deal of the misfortune which befell the young gentleman
who is the hero of this history, and deserves therefore to be mentionedat the outset of his story.
Arthur Pendennis’s schoolfellows at the Greyfriars School state that, as
a boy, he was in no ways remarkable either as a dunce or as a scholar. He
did, in fact, just as much as was required of him, and no more. If he was
distinguished for anything it was for verse-writing: but was his
enthusiasm ever so great, it stopped when he had composed the number of
lines demanded by the regulations (unlike young Swettenham, for instance,
who, with no more of poetry in his composition than Mr. Wakley, yet would
bring up a hundred dreary hexameters to the master after a half-holiday;
or young Fluxmore, who not only did his own verses, but all the fifth
form’s besides). He never read to improve himself out of school-hours,
but, on the contrary, devoured all the novels, plays, and poetry, on
which he could lay his hands. He never was flogged, but it was a wonder
how he escaped the whipping-post. When he had money he spent it royally
in tarts for himself and his friends; he has been known to disburse nine
and sixpence out of ten shillings awarded to him in a single day. When he
had no funds he went on tick. When he could get no credit he went
without, and was almost as happy. He has been known to take a thrashing
for a crony without saying a word; but a blow, ever so slight from a
friend, would make him roar. To fighting he was averse from his earliest
youth, as indeed to physic, the Greek Grammar, or any other exertion, and
would engage in none of them, except at the last extremity. He seldom if
ever told lies, and never bullied little boys. Those masters or seniors
who were kind to him, he loved with boyish ardour. And though the Doctor,
when he did not know his Horace, or could not construe his Greek play,
said that that boy Pendennis was a disgrace to the school, a candidate
for ruin in this world, and perdition in the next; a profligate who would
most likely bring his venerable father to ruin and his mother to a
dishonoured grave, and the like--yet as the Doctor made use of these
compliments to most of the boys in the place (which has not turned out an
unusual number of felons and pickpockets), little Pen, at first uneasy
and terrified by these charges, became gradually accustomed to hear them;
and he has not, in fact, either murdered his parents, or committed any
act worthy of transportation or hanging up to the present day.
There were many of the upper boys, among the Cistercians with whom
Pendennis was educated, who assumed all the privileges of men long before
they quitted that seminary. Many of them, for example, smoked cigars--and
some had already begun the practice of inebriation. One had fought a duel
with an Ensign in a marching, in consequence of a row at the theatre--
another actually kept a buggy and horse at a livery stable in Covent
Garden, and might be seen driving any Sunday in Hyde Park with a groom
with squared arms and armorial buttons by his side. Many of the seniors
were in love, and showed each other in confidence poems addressed to, or
letters and locks of hair received from, young ladies--but Pen, a modest
and timid youth, rather envied these than imitated them as yet. He had
not got beyond the theory as yet--the practice of life was all to come.
And by the way, ye tender mothers and sober fathers of Christian
families, a prodigious thing that theory of life is as orally learned at
a great public school. Why, if you could hear those boys of fourteen who
blush before mothers and sneak off in silence in the presence of their
daughters, talking among each other--it would be the women’s turn toblush then. Before he was twelve years old and if while his mother
fancied him an angel of candour, little Pen had heard talk enough to make
him quite awfully wise upon certain points--and so, Madam, has your
pretty little rosy-cheeked son, who is coming home from school for the
ensuing Christmas holidays. I don’t say that the boy is lost, or that the
innocence has left him which he had from ’Heaven, which is our home,’ but
that the shades of the prison-house are closing very fast over him, and
that we are helping as much as possible to corrupt him.
Well--Pen had just made his public appearance in a coat with a tail, or
cauda virilis, and was looking most anxiously in his little study-glass
to see if his whiskers were growing, like those of more fortunate youths
his companions; and, instead of the treble voice with which he used to
speak and sing (for his singing voice was a very sweet one, and he used
when little to be made to perform ’Home, sweet Home,’ ’My pretty Page,’
and a French song or two which his mother had taught him, and other
ballads for the delectation of the senior boys), had suddenly plunged
into a deep bass diversified by a squeak, which when he was called upon
to construe in school set the master and scholars laughing he was about
sixteen years old, in a word, when he was suddenly called away from his
academic studies.
It was at the close of the forenoon school, and Pen had been unnoticed
all the previous part of the morning till now, when the Doctor put him on
to construe in a Greek play. He did not know a word of it, though little
Timmins, his form-fellow, was prompting him with all his might. Pen had
made a sad blunder or two when the awful Chief broke out upon him.
"Pendennis, sir," he said, "your idleness is incorrigible and your
stupidity beyond example. You are a disgrace to your school, and to your
family, and I have no doubt will prove so in after-life to your country.
If that vice, sir, which is described to us as the root of all evil, be
really what moralists have represented (and I have no doubt of the
correctness of their opinion), for what a prodigious quantity of future
crime and wickedness are you, unhappy boy, laying the seed! Miserable
trifler! A boy who construes de and, instead of de but, at sixteen years
of age is guilty not merely of folly, and ignorance, and dulness
inconceivable, but of crime, of deadly crime, of filial ingratitude,
which I tremble to contemplate. A boy, sir, who does not learn his Greek
play cheats the parent who spends money for his education. A boy who
cheats his parent is not very far from robbing or forging upon his
neighbour. A man who forges on his neighbour pays the penalty of his
crime at the gallows. And it is not such a one that I pity (for he will
be deservedly cut off), but his maddened and heart-broken parents, who
are driven to a premature grave by his crimes, or, if they live, drag on
a wretched and dishonoured old age. Go on, sir, and I warn you that the
very next mistake that you make shall subject you to the punishment of
the rod. Who’s that laughing? What ill-conditioned boy is there that
dares to laugh?" shouted the Doctor.
Indeed, while the master was making this oration, there was a general
titter behind him in the schoolroom. The orator had his back to the door
of this ancient apartment, which was open, and a gentleman who was quitefamiliar with the place, for both Major Arthur and Mr. John Pendennis had
been at the school, was asking the fifth-form boy who sate by the door
for Pendennis. The lad grinning pointed to the culprit against whom the
Doctor was pouring out the thunders of his just wrath--Major Pendennis
could not help laughing. He remembered having stood under that very
pillar where Pen the younger now stood, and having been assaulted by the
Doctor’s predecessor years and years ago. The intelligence was ’passed
round’ that it was Pendennis’s uncle in an instant, and a hundred young
faces wondering and giggling, between terror and laughter, turned now to
the new-comer and then to the awful Doctor.
The Major asked the fifth-form boy to carry his card up to the Doctor,
which the lad did with an arch look. Major Pendennis had written on the
card, "I must take A. P. home; his father is very ill."
As the Doctor received the card, and stopped his harangue with rather a
seared look, the laughter of the boys, half constrained until then, burst
out in a general shout. "Silence!" roared out the Doctor stamping with
his foot. Pen looked up and saw who was his deliverer; the Major beckoned
to him gravely with one of his white gloves, and tumbling down his books,
Pen went across.
The Doctor took out his watch. It was two minutes to one. "We will take
the Juvenal at afternoon school," he said, nodding to the Captain, and
all the boys understanding the signal gathered up their books and poured
out of the hall.
Young Pen saw by his uncle’s face that something had happened at home.
"Is there anything the matter with my mother?" he said. He could hardly
speak, though, for emotion, and the tears which were ready to start.
"No," said the Major, "but your father’s very ill. Go and pack your trunk
directly; I have got a postchaise at the gate."
Pen went off quickly to his boarding-house to do as his uncle bade him;
and the Doctor, now left alone in the schoolroom, came out to shake hands
with his old schoolfellow. You would not have thought it was the same
man. As Cinderella at a particular hour became, from a blazing and
magnificent Princess, quite an ordinary little maid in a grey petticoat,
so, as the clock struck one, all the thundering majesty and awful wrath
of the schoolmaster disappeared.
"There is nothing serious, I hope," said the Doctor. "It is a pity to
take the boy away unless there is. He is a very good boy, rather idle and
unenergetic, but he is a very honest gentlemanlike little fellow, though
I can’t get him to construe as I wish. Won’t you come in and have some
luncheon? My wife will be very happy to see you."
But Major Pendennis declined the luncheon. He said his brother was very
ill, had had a fit the day before, and it was a great question if they
should see him alive.
"There’s no other son, is there?" said the Doctor. The Major answered"No."
"And there’s a good eh--a good eh--property I believe?" asked the other
in an off-hand way.
"H’m--so so," said the Major. Whereupon this colloquy came to an end. And
Arthur Pendennis got into the postchaise with his uncle never to come
back to school any more.
As the chaise drove through Clavering, the hostler standing whistling
under the archway of the Clavering Arms, winked the postilion ominously,
as much as to say all was over. The gardener’s wife came and opened the
lodge-gates, and let the travellers through with a silent shake of the
head. All the blinds were down at Fairoaks--the face of the old footman
was as blank when he let them in. Arthur’s face was white too, with
terror more than with grief. Whatever of warmth and love the deceased man
might have had, and he adored his wife and loved and admired his son with
all his heart, he had shut them up within himself; nor had the boy been
ever able to penetrate that frigid outward barrier. But Arthur had been
his father’s pride and glory through life, and his name the last which
John Pendennis had tried to articulate whilst he lay with his wife’s hand
clasping his own cold and clammy palm, as the flickering spirit went out
into the darkness of death, and life and the world passed away from him.
The little girl, whose face had peered for a moment under the blinds as
the chaise came up, opened the door from the stairs into the hall, and
taking Arthur’s hand silently as he stooped down to kiss her, led him
upstairs to his mother. Old John opened the dining-room door for the
Major. The room was darkened with the blinds down, and surrounded by all
the gloomy pictures of the Pendennises. He drank a glass of wine. The
bottle had been opened for the Squire four days before. His hat was
brushed, and laid on the hall table: his newspapers, and his letter-bag,
with John Pendennis, Esquire, Fairoaks, engraved upon the brass plate,
were there in waiting. The doctor and the lawyer from Clavering, who had
seen the chaise pass through, came up in a gig half an hour after the
Major’s arrival, and entered by the back door. The former gave a detailed
account of the seizure and demise of Mr. Pendennis, enlarged on his
virtues and the estimation in which the neighbourhood held him; on what a
loss he would be to the magistrates’ bench, the County Hospital, etc.
Mrs. Pendennis bore up wonderfully, he said, especially since Master
Arthur’s arrival. The lawyer stayed and dined with Major Pendennis, and
they talked business all the evening. The Major was his brother’s
executor, and joint guardian to the boy with Mrs. Pendennis. Everything
was left unreservedly to her, except in case of a second marriage,--an
occasion which might offer itself in the case of so young and handsome a
woman, Mr. Tatham gallantly said, when different provisions were enacted
by the deceased. The Major would of course take entire superintendence of
everything under this most impressive and melancholy occasion. Aware of
this authority, old John the footman, when he brought Major Pendennis the
candle to go to bed, followed afterwards with the plate-basket; and the
next morning brought him the key of the hall clock--the Squire always
used to wind it up of a Thursday, John said. Mrs. Pendennis’s maid
brought him messages from her mistress. She confirmed the doctor’sreport, of the comfort which Master Arthur’s arrival had caused to his
mother.
What passed between that lady and the boy is not of import. A veil should
be thrown over those sacred emotions of love and grief. The maternal
passion is a sacred mystery to me. What one sees symbolised in the Roman
churches in the image of the Virgin Mother with a bosom bleeding with
love, I think one may witness (and admire the Almighty bounty for) every
day. I saw a Jewish lady, only yesterday, with a child at her knee, and
from whose face towards the child there shone a sweetness so angelical,
that it seemed to form a sort of glory round both. I protest I could have
knelt before her too, and adored in her the Divine beneficence in
endowing us with the maternal storge, which began with our race and
sanctifies the history of mankind.
So it was with this, in a word, that Mrs. Pendennis comforted herself on
the death of her husband, whom, however, she always reverenced as the
best, the most upright, wise, high-minded, accomplished, and awful of
men. If the women did not make idols of us, and if they saw us as we see
each other, would life be bearable, or could society go on? Let a man
pray that none of his womankind should form a just estimation of him. If
your wife knew you as you are, neighbour, she would not grieve much about
being your widow, and would let your grave-lamp go out very soon, or
perhaps not even take the trouble to light it. Whereas Helen Pendennis
put up the handsomest of memorials to her husband, and constantly renewed
it with the most precious oil.
As for Arthur Pendennis, after that awful shock which the sight of his
dead father must have produced on him, and the pity and feeling which
such an event no doubt occasioned, I am not sure that in the very moment
of the grief, and as he embraced his mother and tenderly consoled her,
and promised to love her for ever, there was not springing up in his
breast a feeling of secret triumph and exultation. He was the chief now
and lord. He was Pendennis; and all round about him were his servants and
handmaids. "You’ll never send me away," little Laura said, tripping by
him, and holding his hand. "You won’t send me to school, will you,
Arthur?"
Arthur kissed her and patted her head. No, she shouldn’t go to school. As
for going himself, that was quite out of the question. He had determined
that that part of his life should not be renewed. In the midst of the
general grief, and the corpse still lying above, he had leisure to
conclude that he would have it all holidays for the future, that he
wouldn’t get up till he liked, or stand the bullying of the Doctor any
more, and had made a hundred of such day-dreams and resolves for the
future. How one’s thoughts will travel! and how quickly our wishes beget
them! When he with Laura in his hand went into the kitchen on his way to
the dog-kennel, the fowl-houses, and other his favourite haunts, all the
servants there assembled in great silence with their friends, and the
labouring men and their wives, and Sally Potter who went with the
post-bag to Clavering, and the baker’s man from Clavering--all there
assembled and drinking beer on the melancholy occasion--rose up on his
entrance and bowed or curtseyed to him. They never used to do so lastholidays, he felt at once and with indescribable pleasure. The cook cried
out, "O Lord," and whispered, "How Master Arthur do grow!" Thomas, the
groom, in the act of drinking, put down the jug alarmed before his
master. Thomas’s master felt the honour keenly. He went through and
looked at the pointers. As Flora put her nose up to his waistcoat, and
Ponto, yelling with pleasure, hurtled at his chain, Pen patronised the
dogs, and said, "Poo Ponto, poo Flora," in his most condescending manner.
And then he went and looked at Laura’s hens, and at the pigs, and at the
orchard, and at the dairy; perhaps he blushed to think that it was only
last holidays he had in a manner robbed the great apple-tree, and been
scolded by the dairymaid for taking cream.
They buried John Pendennis, Esquire, "formerly an eminent medical
practitioner at Bath, and subsequently an able magistrate, a benevolent
landlord, and a benefactor to many charities and public institutions in
this neighbourhood and county," with one of the most handsome funerals
that had been seen since Sir Roger Clavering was buried here, the clerk
said, in the abbey church of Clavering St. Mary’s. A fair marble slab,
from which the above inscription is copied, was erected over the
Fairoaks’ pew in the church. On it you may see the Pendennis coat of
arms, and crest, an eagle looking towards the sun, with the motto ’nec
tenui penna,’ to the present day. Doctor Portman alluded to the deceased
most handsomely and affectingly, as "our dear departed friend," in his
sermon next Sunday; and Arthur Pendennis reigned in his stead.
CHAPTER III
In which Pendennis appears as a very young Man indeed
Arthur was about sixteen years old, we have said, when he began to reign;
in person (for I see that the artist who is to illustrate this book, and
who makes sad work of the likeness, will never be able to take my friend
off) he had what his friends would call a dumpy, but his mamma styled a
neat little figure. His hair was of a healthy brown colour, which looks
like gold in the sunshine, his face was round, rosy, freckled, and
good-humoured, his whiskers (when those facial ornaments for which he
sighed so ardently were awarded to him by nature) were decidedly of a
reddish hue; in fact, without being a beauty, he had such a frank,
good-natured kind face, and laughed so merrily at you out of his honest
blue eyes, that no wonder Mrs. Pendennis thought him the pride of the
whole county. Between the ages of sixteen and eighteen he rose from five
feet six to five feet eight inches in height, at which altitude he
paused. But his mother wondered at it. He was three inches taller than
his father. Was it possible that any man could grow to be three inches
taller than Mr. Pendennis?
You may be certain he never went back to school; the discipline of the
establishment did not suit him, and he liked being at home much better.
The question of his return was debated, and his uncle was for his goingback. The Doctor wrote his opinion that it was most important for
Arthur’s success in after-life that he should know a Greek play
thoroughly, but Pen adroitly managed to hint to his mother what a
dangerous place Greyfriars was, and what sad wild fellows some of the
chaps there were, and the timid soul, taking alarm at once, acceded to
his desire to stay at home.
Then Pen’s uncle offered to use his influence with His Royal Highness the
Commander-in-Chief, who was pleased to be very kind to him, and proposed
to get Pen a commission in the Foot Guards. Pen’s heart leaped at this:
he had been to hear the band at St. James’s play on a Sunday, when he
went out to his uncle. He had seen Tom Ricketts, of the fourth form, who
used to wear a jacket and trousers so ludicrously tight, that the elder
boys could not forbear using him in the quality of a butt or ’cockshy’--
he had seen this very Ricketts arrayed in crimson and gold, with an
immense bear-skin cap on his head, staggering under the colours of the
regiment. Tom had recognised him and gave him a patronising nod. Tom, a
little wretch whom he had cut over the back with a hockey-stick last
quarter--and there he was in the centre of the square, rallying round the
flag of his country, surrounded by bayonets, crossbelts, and scarlet, the
band blowing trumpets and banging cymbals--talking familiarly to immense
warriors with tufts to their chins and Waterloo medals. What would not
Pen have given to wear such epaulettes and enter such a service?
But Helen Pendennis, when this point was proposed to her by her son, put
on a face full of terror and alarm. She said she "did not quarrel with
others who thought differently, but that in her opinion a Christian had
no right to make the army a profession. Mr. Pendennis never, never would
have permitted his son to be a soldier. Finally, she should be very
unhappy if he thought of it." Now Pen would have as soon cut off his nose
and ears as deliberately, and of aforethought malice, made his mother
unhappy; and, as he was of such a generous disposition that he would give
away anything to any one, he instantly made a present of his visionary
red coat and epaulettes and his ardour for military glory to his mother.
She thought him the noblest creature in the world. But Major Pendennis,
when the offer of the commission was acknowledged and refused, wrote back
a curt and somewhat angry letter to the widow, and thought his nephew was
rather a spooney.
He was contented, however, when he saw the boy’s performances out hunting
at Christmas, when the Major came down as usual to Fairoaks. Pen had a
very good mare, and rode her with uncommon pluck and grace. He took his
fences with great coolness, and yet with judgment, and without bravado.
He wrote to the chaps at school about his top-boots, and his feats across
country. He began to think seriously of a scarlet coat: and his mother
must own that she thought it would become him remarkably well; though, of
course, she passed hours of anguish during his absence, and daily
expected to see him brought home on a shutter.
With these amusements, in rather too great plenty, it must not be
assumed that Pen neglected his studies altogether. He had a natural taste
for reading every possible kind of book which did not fall into hisschool-course. It was only when they forced his head into the waters of
knowledge, that he refused to drink. He devoured all the books at home
from Inchbald’s Theatre to White’s Farriery; he ransacked the
neighbouring book-cases. He found at Clavering an old cargo of French
novels, which he read with all his might; and he would sit for hours
perched upon the topmost bar of Doctor Portman’s library steps with a
folio on his knees, whether it were Hakluyt’s Travels, Hobbes’s
Leviathan, Augustini Opera, or Chaucer’s Poems. He and the Vicar were
very good friends, and from his Reverence, Pen learned that honest taste
for port wine which distinguished him through life. And as for that dear
good woman, Mrs. Portman, who was not in the least jealous, though her
Doctor avowed himself in love with Mrs. Pendennis, whom he pronounced to
be by far the finest lady in the county--all her grief was, as she looked
up fondly at Pen perched on the book-ladder, that her daughter, Minny,
was too old for him--as indeed she was--Miss Myra Portman being at that
period only two years younger than Pen’s mother, and weighing as much as
Pen and Mrs. Pendennis together.
Are these details insipid? Look back, good friend, at your own youth, and
ask how was that? I like to think of a well-nurtured boy, brave and
gentle, warm-hearted and loving, and looking the world in the face with
kind honest eyes. What bright colours it wore then, and how you enjoyed
it! A man has not many years of such time. He does not know them whilst
they are with him. It is only when they are passed long away that he
remembers how dear and happy they were.
In order to keep Mr. Pen from indulging in that idleness of which his
friend the Doctor of the Cistercians had prophesied such awful
consequences, Mr. Smirke, Dr. Portman’s curate, was engaged at a liberal
salary, to walk or ride over from Clavering and pass several hours daily
with the young gentleman. Smirke was a man perfectly faultless at a
tea-table, wore a curl on his fair forehead, and tied his neck-cloth with
a melancholy grace. He was a decent scholar and mathematician, and taught
Pen as much as the lad was ever disposed to learn, which was not much.
For Pen had soon taken the measure of his tutor, who, when he came riding
into the court-yard at Fairoaks on his pony, turned out his toes so
absurdly, and left such a gap between his knees and the saddle, that it
was impossible for any lad endowed with a sense of humour to respect such
an equestrian. He nearly killed Smirke with terror by putting him on his
mare, and taking him a ride over a common, where the county fox-hounds
(then bunted by that staunch old sportsman, Mr. Hardhead, of
Dumplingbeare) happened to meet. Mr. Smirke, on Pen’s mare, Rebecca (she
was named after Pen’s favourite heroine, the daughter of Isaac of York),
astounded the hounds as much as he disgusted the huntsman, laming one of
the former by persisting in riding amongst the pack, and receiving a
speech from the latter, more remarkable for energy of language, than any
oration he had ever heard since he left the bargemen on the banks of
Isis.
Smirke confided to his pupil his poems both Latin and English; and
presented to Mrs. Pendennis a volume of the latter, printed at Clapham,
his native place. The two read the ancient poets together, and rattled
through them at a pleasant rate, very different from that steady grubbingpace with which the Cistercians used to go over the classic ground,
scenting out each word as they went, and digging up every root in the
way. Pen never liked to halt, but made his tutor construe when he was at
fault, and thus galloped through the Iliad and the Odyssey, the tragic
playwriters, writers, and the charming wicked Aristophanes (whom he vowed
to be the greatest poet of all). But he went at such a pace that, though
he certainly galloped through a considerable extent of the ancient
country, he clean forgot it in after-life, and had only such a vague
remembrance of his early classic course as a man has in the House of
Commons, let us say, who still keeps up two or three quotations; or a
reviewer who, just for decency’s sake, hints at a little Greek. Our
people are the most prosaic in the world, but the most faithful; and with
curious reverence we keep up and transmit, from generation to generation,
the superstition of what we call the education of a gentleman.
Besides the ancient poets, you may be sure Pen read the English with
great gusto. Smirke sighed and shook his head sadly both about Byron and
Moore. But Pen was a sworn fire-worshipper and a Corsair; he had them by
heart, and used to take little Laura into the window and say, "Zuleika, I
am not thy brother," in tones so tragic that they caused the solemn
little maid to open her great eyes still wider. She sat, until the proper
hour for retirement, sewing at Mrs. Pendennis’s knee, and listening to
Pen reading out to her of nights without comprehending one word of what
he read.
He read Shakspeare to his mother (which she said she liked, but didn’t),
and Byron, and Pope, and his favourite Lalla Rookh, which pleased her
indifferently. But as for Bishop Heber, and Mrs. Hemans above all,
this lady used to melt right away, and be absorbed into her
pocket-handkerchief, when Pen read those authors to her in his kind
boyish voice. The ’Christian Year’ was a book which appeared about that
time. The son and the mother whispered it to each other with awe--faint,
very faint, and seldom in after-life Pendennis heard that solemn
church-music: but he always loved the remembrance of it, and of the times
when it struck on his heart, and he walked over the fields full of hope
and void of doubt, as the church-bells rang on Sunday morning.
It was at this period of his existence, that Pen broke out in the Poets’
Corner of the County Chronicle, with some verses with which he was
perfectly well satisfied. His are the verses signed ’NEP.,’ addressed ’To
a Tear;’ ’On the Anniversary of the Battle of Waterloo;’ ’To Madame
Caradori singing at the Assize Meetings;’ ’On Saint Bartholomew’s Day’ (a
tremendous denunciation of Popery, and a solemn warning to the people of
England to rally against emancipating the Roman Catholics), etc., etc.--
all which masterpieces, Mrs. Pendennis no doubt keeps to this day, along
with his first socks, the first cutting of his hair, his bottle, and
other interesting relics of his infancy. He used to gallop Rebecca over
the neighbouring Dumpling Downs, or into the county town, which, if you
please, we shall call Chatteris, spouting his own poems, and filled with
quite a Byronic afflatus as he thought.
His genius at this time was of a decidedly gloomy cast. He brought his
mother a tragedy, in which, though he killed sixteen people before thesecond act, it made her laugh so, that he thrust the masterpiece into the
fire in a pet. He projected an epic poem in blank verse, ’Cortez, or the
Conqueror of Mexico, and the Inca’s Daughter.’ He wrote part of ’Seneca,
or the Fatal Bath,’ and ’Ariadne in Naxos;’ classical pieces, with
choruses and strophes and antistrophes, which sadly puzzled poor Mrs.
Pendennis; and began a ’History of the Jesuits,’ in which he lashed
that Order with tremendous severity, and warned his Protestant
fellow-countrymen of their machinations. His loyalty did his mother’s
heart good to witness. He was a staunch, unflinching Church-and-King man
in those days; and at the election, when Sir Giles Beanfield stood on the
Blue interest, against Lord Trehawk, Lord Eyrie’s son, a Whig and a
friend of Popery, Arthur Pendennis, with an immense bow for himself,
which his mother made, and with a blue ribbon for Rebecca, rode alongside
of the Reverend Doctor Portman, on his grey mare Dowdy, and at the head
of the Clavering voters, whom the Doctor brought up to plump for the
Protestant Champion.
On that day Pen made his first speech at the Blue Hotel: and also, it
appears, for the first time in his life--took a little more wine than was
good for him. Mercy! what a scene it was at Fairoaks, when he rode back
at ever so much o’clock at night. What moving about of lanterns in the
court-yard and stables, though the moon was shining out; what a gathering
of servants, as Pen came home, clattering over the bridge and up the
stableyard, with half a score of the Clavering voters yelling after him
the Blue song of the election.
He wanted them all to come in and have some wine--some very good Madeira
--some capital Madeira--John, go and get some Madeira,--and there is no
knowing what the farmers would have done, had not Madam Pendennis made
her appearance in a white wrapper, with a candle--and scared those
zealous Blues so by the sight of her pale handsome face, that they
touched their hats and rode off.
Besides these amusements and occupations in which Mr. Pen indulged, there
was one which forms the main business and pleasure of youth, if the poets
tell us aright, whom Pen was always studying; and this young fellow’s
heart was so ardent, and his imagination so eager, that it is not to be
expected he should long escape the passion to which we allude, and which,
ladies, you have rightly guessed to be that of Love. Pen sighed for it
first in secret, and, like the love-sick swain in Ovid, opened his breast
and said, "Aura, veni." What generous youth is there that has not courted
some such windy mistress in his time?
Yes, Pen began to feel the necessity of a first love--of a consuming
passion--of an object on which he could concentrate all those vague
floating fancies under which he sweetly suffered--of a young lady to whom
he could really make verses, and whom he could set up and adore, in place
of those unsubstantial Ianthes and Zuleikas to whom he addressed the
outpourings of his gushing muse. He read his favourite poems over and
over again, he called upon Alma Venus the delight of gods and men, he
translated Anacreon’s odes, and picked out passages suitable to his
complaint from Waller, Dryden, Prior, and the like. Smirke and he were
never weary, in their interviews, of discoursing about love. Thefaithless tutor entertained him with sentimental conversations in place
of lectures on algebra and Greek; for Smirke was in love too. Who could
help it, being in daily intercourse with such a woman? Smirke was madly
in love (as far as such a mild flame as Mr. Smirke’s may be called
madness) with Mrs. Pendennis. That honest lady, sitting down below stairs
teaching little Laura to play the piano, or devising flannel petticoats
for the poor round about her, or otherwise busied with the calm routine
of her modest and spotless Christian life, was little aware what storms
were brewing in two bosoms upstairs in the study--in Pen’s, as he sate in
his shooting jacket, with his elbows on the green study-table, and his
hands clutching his curly brown hair, Homer under his nose,--and in
worthy Mr. Smirke’s, with whom he was reading. Here they would talk about
Helen and Andromache. "Andromache’s like my mother," Pen used to avouch;
"but I say, Smirke, by Jove I’d cut off my nose to see Helen;" and he
would spout certain favourite lines which the reader will find in their
proper place in the third book. He drew portraits of her--they are extant
still--with straight noses and enormous eyes, and ’Arthur Pendennis
delineavit et pinxit’ gallantly written underneath.
As for Mr. Smirke he naturally preferred Andromache. And in consequence
he was uncommonly kind to Pen. He gave him his Elzevir Horace, of which
the boy was fond, and his little Greek Testament which his own mamma at
Clapham had purchased and presented to him. He bought him a silver
pencil-case; and in the matter of learning let him do just as much or as
little as ever he pleased. He always seemed to be on the point of
unbosoming himself to Pen: nay, he confessed to the latter that he had
a--an attachment, an ardently cherished attachment, about which Pendennis
longed to hear, and said, "Tell us, old chap, is she handsome? has she
got blue eyes or black?" But Doctor Portman’s curate, heaving a gentle
sigh, cast up his eyes to the ceiling, and begged Pen faintly to change
the conversation. Poor Smirke! He invited Pen to dine at his lodgings
over Madame Fribsby’s, the milliner’s, in Clavering; and once when it was
raining, and Mrs. Pendennis, who had driven in her pony-chaise into
Clavering with respect to some arrangements, about leaving off mourning
probably, was prevailed upon to enter the curate’s apartments, he sent
out for pound-cakes instantly. The sofa on which she sate became sacred
to him from that day: and he kept flowers in the glass which she drank
from ever after.
As Mrs. Pendennis was never tired of hearing the praises of her son, we
may be certain that this rogue of a_ tutor neglected no opportunity of
conversing with her upon that subject. It might be a little tedious to
him to hear the stories about Pen’s generosity, about his bravery in
fighting the big naughty boy, about his fun and jokes, about his
prodigious skill in Latin, music, riding, etc., but what price would he
not pay to be in her company? and the widow, after these conversations,
thought Mr. Smirke a very pleasing and well-informed man. As for her son,
she had not settled in her mind whether he was to be Senior Wrangler and
Archbishop of Canterbury, or Double First Class at Oxford, and Lord
Chancellor. That all England did not possess his peer, was a fact about
which there was, in her mind, no manner of question.
A simple person, of inexpensive habits, she began forthwith to save, and,perhaps, to be a little parsimonious, in favour of her boy. There were no
entertainments, of course, at Fairoaks, during the year of her weeds.
Nor, indeed, did the Doctor’s silver dish-covers, of which he was so
proud, and which were flourished all over with the arms of the
Pendennises, and surmounted with their crest, come out of the
plate-chests again for long, long years. The household was diminished,
and its expenses curtailed. There was a very blank anchorite repast when
Pen dined from home: and he himself headed the remonstrance from the
kitchen regarding the deteriorated quality of the Fairoaks beer. She was
becoming miserly for Pen. Indeed, who ever accused women of being just?
They are always sacrificing themselves or somebody for somebody else’s
sake.
There happened to be no young woman in the small circle of friends who
were in the widow’s intimacy whom Pendennis could by any possibility
gratify by endowing her with the inestimable treasure of a heart which he
was longing to give away. Some young fellows in this predicament bestow
their young affections upon Dolly, the dairymaid, or cast the eyes of
tenderness upon Molly, the blacksmith’s daughter. Pen thought a Pendennis
much too grand a personage to stoop so low. He was too high-minded for a
vulgar intrigue, and, at the idea of an intrigue or a seduction, had he
ever entertained it, his heart would have revolted as from the notion of
any act of baseness or dishonour. Miss Minny Portman was too old, too
large, and too fond of reading ’Rollin’s Ancient History.’ The Miss
Boardbacks, Admiral Boardback’s daughters (of St. Vincent’s, or Fourth of
June House, as it was called), disgusted Pen with the London airs which
they brought into the country, from Gloucester Place, where they passed
the season, and looked down upon Pen as a chit. Captain Glanders’s (H.P.,
50th Dragoon Guards) three girls were in brown-holland pinafores as yet,
with the ends of their hair-plaits tied up in dirty pink ribbon. Not
having acquired the art of dancing, the youth avoided such chances as he
might have had of meeting with the fair sex at the Chatteris’ Assemblies;
in fine, he was not in love, because there was nobody at hand to fall in
love with. And the young monkey used to ride out, day after day in
quest, of Dulcinea; and peep into the pony-chaises and gentlefolks’
carriages, as they drove along the broad turnpike roads, with a heart
beating within him, and a secret tremor and hope that she might be in
that yellow postchaise coming swinging up the hill, or one of those three
girls in beaver bonnets in the back seat of the double gig, which the fat
old gentleman in black was driving, at four miles an hour. The
postchaise contained a snuffy old dowager of seventy, with a maid, her
contemporary. The three girls in the beaver bonnets were no handsomer
than the turnips that skirted the roadside. Do as he might, and ride
where he would, the fairy princess that he was to rescue and win, had not
yet appeared to honest Pen.
Upon these points he did not discourse to his mother. He had a world of
his own. What generous, ardent, imaginative soul has not a secret
pleasure-place in which it disports? Let no clumsy prying or dull
meddling of ours try to disturb it in our children. Actaeon was a brute
for wanting to push in where Diana was bathing. Leave him occasionally
alone, my good madam, if you have a poet for a child. Even your admirable
advice may be a bore sometimes. You are faultless; but it does not followthat everybody in your family is to think exactly like yourself. Yonder
little child may have thoughts too deep even for your great mind, and
fancies so coy and timid that they will not bare themselves when your
ladyship sits by.
Helen Pendennis by the force of sheer love divined a great number of her
son’s secrets. But she kept these things in her heart (if we may so
speak), and did not speak of them. Besides, she had made up her mind that
he was to marry little Laura, who would be eighteen when Pen was
six-and-twenty: and had finished his college career, and had made his
grand tour, and was settled either in London, astonishing all the
metropolis by his learning and eloquence at the bar, or better still in a
sweet country parsonage surrounded with hollyhocks and roses, close to a
delightful romantic ivy-covered church, from the pulpit of which Pen
would utter the most beautiful sermons ever preached.
While these natural sentiments were waging war and trouble in honest
Pen’s bosom, it chanced one day that he rode into Chatteris, for the
purpose of carrying to the County Chronicle a tremendous and thrilling
poem for the next week’s paper; and putting up his horse according to
custom, at the stables of the George Hotel there, he fell in with an old
acquaintance. A grand black tandem, with scarlet wheels, came rattling
into the inn yard, as Pen stood there in converse with the hostler about
Rebecca; and the voice of the driver called out, "Hallo, Pendennis, is
that you?" in a loud patronising manner. Pen had some difficulty in
recognising under the broad-brimmed hat and the vast great-coats and
neckcloths, with which the new-comer was habited, the person and figure
of his quondam schoolfellow, Mr. Foker.
A year’s absence had made no small difference in that gentleman. A youth
who had been deservedly whipped a few months previously, and who spent
his pocket-money on tarts and hardbake, now appeared before Pen in one of
those costumes to which the public consent, that I take to be quite as
influential in this respect as ’Johnson’s Dictionary,’ has awarded the
title of "Swell.’ He had a bull-dog between his legs, and in his scarlet
shawl neckcloth was a pin representing another bull-dog in gold: he wore
a fur waistcoat laced over with gold chains; a green cutaway coat with
basket-buttons, and a white upper-coat ornamented with cheese-plate
buttons, on each of which was engraved some stirring incident of the road
or the chase; all which ornaments set off this young fellow’s figure to
such advantage, that you would hesitate to say which character in life he
most resembled, and whether he was a boxer en goguette, or a coachman in
his gala suit.
"Left that place for good, Pendennis?" Mr. Foker said, descending from
his landau and giving Pendennis a finger.
"Yes, this year--or more," Pen said.
"Beastly old hole," Mr. Foker remarked. "Hate it. Hate the Doctor: hate
Towzer, the second master; hate everybody there. Not a fit place for a
gentleman.""Not at all," said Pen, with an air of the utmost consequence.
"By gad, sir, I sometimes dream, now, that the Doctor’s walking into me,"
Foker continued (and Pen smiled as he thought that he himself had
likewise fearful dreams of this nature). "When I think of the diet there,
by gad, sir, I wonder how I stood it. Mangy mutton, brutal beef; pudding
on Thursdays and Sundays, and that fit to poison you. Just look at my
leader--did you ever see a prettier animal? Drove over from Baymouth.
Came the nine mile in two-and-forty minutes. Not bad going, sir."
"Are you stopping at Baymouth, Foker?" Pendennis asked.
"I’m coaching there," said the other, with a nod.
"What?" asked Pen, and in a tone of such wonder, that Foker burst out
laughing, and said, "He was blowed if he didn’t think Pen was such a flat
as not to know what coaching meant."
"I’m come down with a coach from Oxford. A tutor, don’t you see, old boy?
He’s coaching me, and some other men, for the little go. Me and Spavin
have the drag between us. And I thought I’d just tool over and go to the
play. Did you ever see Rowkins do the hornpipe?" and Mr. Foker began to
perform some steps of that popular dance in the inn yard, looking round
for the sympathy of his groom and the stable-men.
Pen thought he would like to go to the play too: and could ride home
afterwards, as there was a moonlight. So he accepted Foker’s invitation
to dinner, and the young men entered the inn together, where Mr. Foker
stopped at the bar, and called upon Miss Rincer, the landlady’s fair
daughter, who presided there, to give him a glass of ’his mixture.’
Pen and his family had been known at the George ever since they came into
the country; and Mr. Pendennis’s carriages and horses always put up there
when he paid a visit to the county town. The landlady dropped the heir of
Fairoaks a very respectful curtsey, and complimented him upon his growth
and manly appearance, and asked news of the family at Fairoaks, and of
Doctor Portman and the Clavering people, to all of which questions the
young gentleman answered with much affability. But he spoke to Mr. and
Mrs. Rincer with that sort of good nature with which a young Prince
addresses his father’s subjects; never dreaming that those bonnes gens
were his equals in life.
Mr. Foker’s behaviour was quite different. He inquired for Rincer and the
cold in his nose, told Mrs. Rincer a riddle, asked Miss Rincer when she
would be ready to marry him, and paid his compliments to Miss Brett, the
other young lady in the bar, all in a minute of time, and with a
liveliness and facetiousness which set all these ladies in a giggle; and
he gave a cluck, expressive of great satisfaction, as he tossed off his
mixture which Miss Rincer prepared and handed to him.
"Have a drop," said he to Pen, "it’s recommended to me by the faculty as
a what-do-you-call-’em--a stomatic, old boy. Give the young one a glass,
R., and score it up to yours truly."Poor Pen took a glass, and everybody laughed at the face which he made as
he put it down--gin, bitters, and some other cordial was the compound
with which Mr. Foker was so delighted as to call it by the name of
Foker’s own. As Pen choked, sputtered, and made faces, the other took
occasion to remark to Mr. Rincer that the young fellow was green, very
green, but that he would soon form him; and then they proceeded to order
dinner--which Mr. Foker determined should consist of turtle and venison;
cautioning the landlady to be very particular about icing the wine.
Then Messrs. Foker and Pen strolled down the High Street together--the
former having a cigar in his mouth, which he had drawn out of a case
almost as big as a portmanteau. He went in to replenish it at Mr.
Lewis’s, and talked to that gentleman for a while, sitting down on the
counter: he then looked in at the fruiterer’s, to see the pretty girl
there, to whom he paid compliments similar to those before addressed to
the bar at the George; then they passed the County Chronicle office, for
which Pen had his packet ready, in the shape of ’Lines to Thyrza,’ but
poor Pen did not like to put the letter into the editor’s box while
walking in company with such a fine gentleman as Mr. Foker. They met
heavy dragoons of the regiment always quartered at Chatteris; and stopped
and talked about the Baymouth balls, and what a pretty girl was Miss
Brown, and what a dem fine woman Mrs. Jones was. It was in vain that Pen
recalled to his own mind what a stupid ass Foker used to be at school--
how he could scarcely read, how he was not cleanly in his person, and
notorious for his blunders and dulness. Mr. Foker was no more like a
gentleman now than in his school days: and yet Pen felt a secret pride in
strutting down High Street with a young fellow who owned tandems, talked
to officers, and ordered turtle and champagne for dinner. He listened,
and with respect too, to Mr. Foker’s accounts of what the men did at the
University of which Mr. F. was an ornament, and encountered a long series
of stories about boat-racing, bumping, College grass-plats, and
milk-punch--and began to wish to go up himself to College to a place
where there were such manly pleasures and enjoyments. Farmer Gurnett, who
lives close by Fairoaks, riding by at this minute and touching his hat to
Pen, the latter stopped him, and sent a message to his mother to say that
he had met with an old schoolfellow, and should dine in Chatteris.
The two young gentlemen continued their walk, and were passing round the
Cathedral Yard, where they could hear the music of the afternoon service
(a music which always exceedingly impressed and affected Pen), but
whither Mr. Foker came for the purpose of inspecting the nursery-maids
who frequent the Elms Walk there, and who are uncommonly pretty at
Chatteris, and here they strolled until with a final burst of music the
small congregation was played out.
Old Doctor Portman was one of the few who came from the venerable gate.
Spying Pen, he came and shook him by the hand, and eyed with wonder Pen’s
friend, from whose mouth and cigar clouds of fragrance issued, which
curled round the Doctor’s honest face and shovel hat.
"An old schoolfellow of mine, Mr. Foker," said Pen. The Doctor said
"H’m": and scowled at the cigar. He did not mind a pipe in his study, butthe cigar was an abomination to the worthy gentleman.
"I came up on Bishop’s business," the Doctor said. "We’ll ride home,
Arthur, if you like?"
"I--I’m engaged to my friend here," Pen answered.
"You had better come home with me," said the Doctor.
"His mother knows he’s out, sir," Mr. Foker remarked; "don’t she,
Pendennis?"
"But that does not prove that he had not better come home with me," the
Doctor growled, and he walked off with great dignity.
"Old boy don’t like the weed, I suppose," Foker said. "Ha! who’s here?--
here’s the General, and Bingley, the manager. How do, Cos? How do,
Bingley?"
"How does my worthy and gallant young Foker?" said the gentleman
addressed as the General; and who wore a shabby military cape with a
mangy collar, and a hat cocked very much over one eye.
"Trust you are very well, my very dear sir," said the other gentleman,
"and that the Theatre Royal will have the honour of your patronage
to-night. We perform ’The Stranger,’ in which your humble servant
will---"
"Can’t stand you in tights and Hessians, Bingley," young Mr. Foker said.
On which the General, with the Irish accent, said, "But I think ye’ll
like Miss Fotheringay, in Mrs. Haller, or me name’s not Jack Costigan."
Pen looked at these individuals with the greatest interest. He had never
seen an actor before; and he saw Dr. Portman’s red face looking over the
Doctor’s shoulder, as he retreated from the Cathedral Yard, evidently
quite dissatisfied with the acquaintances into whose hands Pen had
fallen.
Perhaps it would have been much better for him had he taken the parson’s
advice and company home. But which of us knows his fate?
CHAPTER IV
Mrs. Haller
Having returned to the George, Mr. Foker and his guest sate down to a
handsome repast in the coffee-room; where Mr. Rincer brought in the first
dish, and bowed as gravely as if he was waiting upon the Lord-Lieutenant
of the county. Mr. Foker attacked the turtle and venison with as muchgusto as he had shown the year before, when he used to make feasts off
ginger-beer and smuggled polonies. Pen could not but respect his
connoisseurship as he pronounced the champagne to be condemned
gooseberry, and winked at the port with one eye. The latter he declared
to be of the right sort; and told the waiters there was no way of
humbugging him. All these attendants he knew by their Christian names,
and showed a great interest in their families; and as the London coaches
drove up, which in those early days used to set off from the George, Mr.
Foker flung the coffee-room window open, and called the guards and
coachmen by their Christian names, too, asking about their respective
families, and imitating with great liveliness and accuracy the tooting of
the horns as Jem the ostler whipped the horses’ cloths off, and the
carriages drove gaily away.
"A bottle of sherry, a bottle of sham, a bottle of port and a shass
caffy, it ain’t so bad, hay, Pen?" Foker said, and pronounced, after all
these delicacies and a quantity of nuts and fruit had been dispatched,
that it was time to "toddle." Pen sprang up with very bright eyes, and a
flushed face; and they moved off towards the theatre, where they paid
their money to the wheezy old lady slumbering in the money-taker’s box.
"Mrs. Dropsicum, Bingley’s mother-in-law, great in Lady Macbeth," Foker
said to his companion. Foker knew her, too.
They had almost their choice of places in the boxes of the theatre, which
was no better filled than country theatres usually are in spite of the
"universal burst of attraction and galvanic thrills of delight"
advertised by Bingley in the play-bills. A score or so of people dotted
the pit-benches, a few more kept a kicking and whistling in the
galleries, and a dozen others, who came in with free admissions, were in
the boxes where our young gentlemen sate. Lieutenants Rodgers and
Podgers, and young Cornet Tidmus, of the Dragoons, occupied a private
box. The performers acted to them, and these gentlemen seemed to hold
conversations with the players when not engaged in the dialogue, and
applauded them by name loudly.
Bingley the manager, who assumed all the chief tragic and comic parts
except when he modestly retreated to make way for the London stars, who
came down occasionally to Chatteris, was great in the character of the
’Stranger.’ He was attired in the tight pantaloons and Hessian boots
which the stage legend has given to that injured man, with a large cloak
and beaver and a hearse feather in it drooping over his raddled old face,
and only partially concealing his great buckled brown wig. He had the
stage jewellery on too, of which he selected the largest and most shiny
rings for himself, and allowed his little finger to quiver out of his
cloak with a sham diamond ring covering the first joint of the finger and
twiddling in the faces of the pit. Bingley made it a favour to the young
men of his company to go on in light comedy parts with that ring. They
flattered him by asking its history. The stage has its traditional jewels
as the Crown and all great families have. This had belonged to George
Frederick Cooke, who had had it from Mr. Quin, who may have bought it for
a shilling. Bingley fancied the world was fascinated with its glitter.
He was reading out of the stage-book--that wonderful stage-book which isnot bound like any other book in the world, but is rouged and tawdry like
the hero or heroine who holds it; and who holds it as people never do
hold books: and points with his finger to a passage, and wags his head
ominously at the audience, and then lifts up eyes and finger to the
ceiling professing to derive some intense consolation from the work
between which and heaven there is a strong affinity. Anybody who has ever
seen one of our great light comedians, X., in a chintz dressing-gown,
such as nobody ever wore, and representing himself to the public as a
young nobleman in his apartments, and whiling away the time with light
literature until his friend Sir Harry shall arrive, or his father shall
come down to breakfast--anybody, I say, who has seen the great X. over a
sham book has indeed had a great pleasure and an abiding matter for
thought.
Directly the Stranger saw the young men, he acted at them; eyeing them
solemnly over his gilt volume as he lay on the stage-bank showing his
hand, his ring, and his Hessians. He calculated the effect that every one
of these ornaments would produce upon his victims: he was determined to
fascinate them, for he knew they had paid their money; and he saw their
families coming in from the country and filling the cane chairs in his
boxes.
As he lay on the bank reading, his servant, Francis, made remarks upon
his master.
"Again reading," said Francis, "thus it is, from morn to night. To him
nature has no beauty--life no charm. For three years I have never seen
him smile" (the gloom of Bingley’s face was fearful to witness during
these comments of the faithful domestic). "Nothing diverts him. O, if he
would but attach himself to any living thing, were it an animal--for
something man must love."
[Enter Tobias (Goll) from the hut.] He cries, "O, how refreshing, after
seven long weeks, to feel these warm sunbeams once again. Thanks,
bounteous heaven, for the joy I taste!" He presses his cap between his
hands, looks up and prays. The Stranger eyes him attentively.
Francis to the Stranger. "This old man’s share of earthly happiness can
be but little. Yet mark how grateful he is for his portion of it."
Bingley. "Because though old, he is but a child in the leading-string of
hope." (He looks steadily at Foker, who, however, continues to suck the
top of his stick in an unconcerned manner.)
Francis. "Hope is the nurse of life."
Bingley. "And her cradle--is the grave."
The Stranger uttered this with the moan of a bassoon in agony, and fixed
his eyes on Pendennis so steadily, that the poor lad was quite put out of
countenance. He thought the whole house must be looking at him; and cast
his eyes down. As soon as ever he raised them Bingley’s were at him
again. All through the scene the manager played at him. When he was aboutto do a good action, and sent off Francis with his book, so that that
domestic should not witness the deed of benevolence which he meditated,
Bingley marked the page carefully, so that he might continue the perusal
of the volume off the stage if he liked. But all was done in the direct
face of Pendennis, whom the manager was bent upon subjugating. How
relieved the lad was when the scene ended, and Foker, tapping with his
cane, cried out "Bravo, Bingley!"
"Give him a hand, Pendennis; you know every chap likes a hand," Mr. Foker
said; and the good-natured young gentleman, and Pendennis laughing, and
the dragoons in the opposite box, began clapping hands to the best of
their power.
A chamber in Wintersen Castle closed over Tobias’s hut and the Stranger
and his boots; and servants appeared bustling about with chairs and
tables--"That’s Hicks and Miss Thackthwaite," whispered Foker. "Pretty
girl, ain’t she, Pendennis? But stop--hurray--bravo! here’s the
Fotheringay."
The pit thrilled and thumped its umbrellas; a volley of applause was
fired from the gallery: the Dragoon officers and Foker clapped their
hands furiously: you would have thought the house was full, so loud were
their plaudits. The red face and ragged whiskers of Mr. Costigan were
seen peering from the side-scene. Pen’s eyes opened wide and bright as
Mrs. Haller entered with a downcast look, then rallying at the sound of
the applause, swept the house with a grateful glance, and, folding her
hands across her breast, sank down in a magnificent curtsey. More
applause, more umbrellas; Pen this time, flaming with wine and
enthusiasm, clapped hands and sang "bravo" louder than all. Mrs. Haller
saw him, and everybody else, and old Mr. Bows, the little first fiddler
of the orchestra (which was this night increased by a detachment of the
band of the Dragoons, by the kind permission of Colonel Swallowtail),
looked up from the desk where he was perched, with his crutch beside him,
and smiled at the enthusiasm of the lad.
Those who have only seen Miss Fotheringay in later days, since her
marriage and introduction into London life, have little idea how
beautiful a creature she was at the time when our friend Pen first set
eyes on her: and I warn my reader, as beforehand, that the pencil which
illustrates this work (and can draw an ugly face tolerably well, but is
sadly put out when it tries to delineate a beauty) can give no sort of
notion of her. She was of the tallest of women, and at her then age of
six-and-twenty-for six-and-twenty she was, though she vows she was only
nineteen--in the prime and fulness of her beauty. Her forehead was vast,
and her black hair waved over it with a natural ripple (that beauties of
late days have tried to imitate with the help of the crimping-irons), and
was confined in shining and voluminous braids at the back of a neck such
as you see on the shoulders of the Louvre Venus--that delight of gods and
men. Her eyes, when she lifted them up to gaze on you, and ere she
dropped their purple deep-fringed lids, shone with tenderness and mystery
unfathomable. Love and Genius seemed to look out from them and then
retire coyly, as if ashamed to have been seen at the lattice. Who could
have had such a commanding brow but a woman of high intellect? She neverlaughed (indeed her teeth were not good), but a smile of endless
tenderness and sweetness played round her beautiful lips, and in the
dimples of her cheeks and her lovely chin. Her nose defied description in
those days. Her ears were like two little pearl shells, which the
earrings she wore (though the handsomest properties in the theatre) only
insulted. She was dressed in long flowing robes of black, which she
managed and swept to and fro with wonderful grace, and out of the folds
of which you only saw her sandals occasionally; they were of rather a
large size; but Pen thought them as ravishing as the slippers of
Cinderella. But it was her hand and arm that this magnificent creature
most excelled in, and somehow you could never see her but through them.
They surrounded her. When she folded them over her bosom in resignation;
when she dropped them in mute agony, or raised them in superb command;
when in sportive gaiety her hands fluttered and waved before her, like
what shall we say?--like the snowy doves before the chariot of Venus--it
was with these arms and hands that she beckoned, repelled, entreated,
embraced, her admirers--no single one, for she was armed with her own
virtue, and with her father’s valour, whose sword would have leapt from
its scabbard at any insult offered to his child--but the whole house;
which rose to her, as the phrase was, as she curtseyed and bowed, and
charmed it.
Thus she stood for a minute--complete and beautiful--as Pen stared at
her. "I say, Pen, isn’t she a stunner?" asked Mr. Foker.
"Hush!" Pen said, "she’s speaking."
She began her business in a deep sweet voice. Those who know the play of
the ’Stranger,’ are aware that the remarks made by the various characters
are not valuable in themselves, either for their sound sense, their
novelty of observation, or their poetic fancy. In fact, if a man were to
say it was a stupid play, he would not be far wrong. Nobody ever talked
so. If we meet idiots in life, as will happen, it is a great mercy that
they do not use such absurdly fine words. The Stranger’s talk is sham,
like the book he reads and the hair he wears, and the bank he sits on,
and the diamond ring he makes play with--but, in the midst of the
balderdash, there runs that reality of love, children, and forgiveness of
wrong, which will be listened to wherever it is preached, and sets all
the world sympathising.
With what smothered sorrow, with what gushing pathos, Mrs. Haller
delivered her part! At first, when as Count Wintersen’s housekeeper, and
preparing for his Excellency’s arrival, she has to give orders about the
beds and furniture, and the dinner, etc., to be got ready, she did so
with the calm agony of despair. But when she could get rid of the stupid
servants and give vent to her feelings to the pit and the house, she
overflowed to each individual as if he were her particular confidant, and
she was crying out her griefs on his shoulder: the little fiddler in the
orchestra (whom she did not seem to watch, though he followed her
ceaselessly) twitched, twisted, nodded, pointed about, and when she came
to the favourite passage, "I have a William too, if he be still alive--
Ah, yes, if he be still alive. His little sisters, too! Why, Fancy, dost
thou rack me so? Why dost thou image my poor children fainting insickness, and crying to--to--their mum--um--other," when she came to this
passage little Bows buried his face in his blue cotton handkerchief,
after crying out "Bravo."
All the house was affected. Foker, for his part, taking out a large
yellow bandanna, wept piteously. As for Pen, he was gone too far for
that. He followed the woman about and about--when she was off the stage,
it and the house were blank; the lights and the red officers, reeled
wildly before his sight. He watched her at the side-scene--where she
stood waiting to come on the stage, and where her father took off her
shawl: when the reconciliation arrived, and she flung herself down on Mr.
Bingley’s shoulders, whilst the children clung to their knees, and the
Countess (Mrs. Bingley) and Baron Steinforth (performed with great
liveliness and spirit by Garbetts)--while the rest of the characters
formed a group round them, Pen’s hot eyes only saw Fotheringay,
Fotheringay. The curtain fell upon him like a pall. He did not hear a
word of what Bingley said, who came forward to announce the play for the
next evening, and who took the tumultuous applause, as usual, for
himself. Pen was not even distinctly aware that the house was calling for
Miss Fotheringay, nor did the manager seem to comprehend that anybody
else but himself had caused the success of the play. At last he
understood it--stepped back with a grin, and presently appeared with Mrs.
Haller on his arm. How beautiful she looked! Her hair had fallen down,
the officers threw her flowers. She clutched them to her heart. She put
back her hair, and smiled all round. Her eyes met Pen’s. Down went the
curtain again: and she was gone. Not one note could he hear of the
overture which the brass band of the dragoons blew by kind permission of
Colonel Swallowtail.
"She is a crusher, ain’t she now!" Mr. Foker asked of his companion.
Pen did not know exactly what Foker said, and answered vaguely. He could
not tell the other what he felt; he could not have spoken, just then, to
any mortal. Besides, Pendennis did not quite know what he felt yet; it
was something overwhelming, maddening, delicious; a fever of wild joy and
undefined longing.
And now Rowkins and Miss Thackthwaite came on to dance the favourite
double hornpipe, and Foker abandoned himself to the delights of this
ballet, just as he had to the tears of the tragedy, a few minutes before.
Pen did not care for it, or indeed think about the dance, except to
remember that that woman was acting with her in the scene where she first
came in. It was a mist before his eyes. At the end of the dance he looked
at his watch and said it was time for him to go.
"Hang it, stay to see The Bravo of the Battle-Axe," Foker said,
"Bingley’s splendid in it; he wears red tights, and has to carry Mrs. B.
over the Pine-bridge of the Cataract, only she’s too heavy. It’s great
fun, do stop."
Pen looked at the bill with one lingering fond hope that Miss
Fotheringay’s name might be hidden, somewhere, in the list of the actors
of the after-piece, but there was no such name. Go he must. He had a longride home. He squeezed Foker’s hand. He was choking to speak, but he
couldn’t. He quitted the theatre and walked frantically about the town,
he knew not how long; then he mounted at the George and rode homewards,
and Clavering clock sang out one as he came into the yard at Fairoaks.
The lady of the house might have been awake, but she only heard him from
the passage outside his room as he dashed into bed and pulled the clothes
over his head.
Pen had not been in the habit of passing wakeful nights, so he at once
fell off into a sound sleep. Even in later days and with a great deal of
care and other thoughtful matter to keep him awake, a man from long
practice or fatigue or resolution begins by going to sleep as usual: and
gets a nap in advance of Anxiety. But she soon comes up with him and jogs
his shoulder, and says, "Come, my man, no more of this laziness, you must
wake up and have a talk with me." Then they fall to together in the
midnight. Well, whatever might afterwards happen to him, poor little Pen
was not come to this state yet; he tumbled into a sound sleep--did not
wake until an early hour in the morning, when the rooks began to caw from
the little wood beyond his bedroom windows; and--at that very instant and
as his eyes started open, the beloved image was in his mind. "My dear
boy," he heard her say, "you were in a sound sleep and I would not
disturb you: but I have been close by your pillow all this while: and I
don’t intend that you shall leave me. I am Love! I bring with me fever
and passion: wild longing, maddening desire; restless craving and
seeking. Many a long day ere this I heard you calling out for me; and
behold now I am come."
Was Pen frightened at the summons? Not he. He did not know what was
coming: it was all wild pleasure and delight as yet. And as, when three
years previously, and on entering the fifth form at the Cistercians, his
father had made him a present of a gold watch which the boy took from
under his pillow and examined on the instant of waking: for ever rubbing
and polishing it up in private and retiring into corners to listen to its
ticking: so the young man exulted over his new delight; felt in his
waistcoat pocket to see that it was safe; wound it up at nights, and at
the very first moment of waking hugged it and looked at it.--By the way,
that first watch of Pen’s was a showy ill-manufactured piece: it never
went well from the beginning, and was always getting out of order. And
after putting it aside into a drawer and forgetting it for some time, he
swapped it finally away for a more useful time-keeper.
Pen felt himself to be ever so many years older since yesterday. There
was no mistake about it now. He was as much in love as the best hero in
the best romance he ever read. He told John to bring his shaving water
with the utmost confidence. He dressed himself in some of his finest
clothes that morning: and came splendidly down to breakfast, patronising
his mother and little Laura, who had been strumming her music lesson for
hours before; and who after he had read the prayers (of which he did not
heed one single syllable) wondered at his grand appearance, and asked him
to tell her what the play was about?
Pen laughed and declined to tell Laura what the play was about. In fact
it was quite as well that she should not know. Then she asked him why hehad got on his fine pin and beautiful new waistcoat?
Pen blushed and told his mother that the old schoolfellow with whom he
had dined at Chatteris was reading with a tutor at Baymouth, a very
learned man; and as he was himself to go to College, and as there were
several young men pursuing their studies at Baymouth--he was anxious to
ride over-and-and just see what the course of their reading was.
Laura made a long face. Helen Pendennis looked hard at her son, troubled
more than ever with the vague doubt and terror which had been haunting
her ever since the last night, when Farmer Gurnett brought back the news
that Pen would not return home to dinner. Arthur’s eyes defied her. She
tried to console herself, and drive off her fears. The boy had never told
her an untruth. Pen conducted himself during breakfast in a very haughty
and supercilious manner; and, taking leave of the elder and younger lady,
was presently heard riding out of the stablecourt. He went gently at
first, but galloped like a madman as soon as he thought that he was out
of hearing.
Smirke, thinking of his own affairs, and softly riding with his toes out,
to give Pen his three hours’ reading at Fairoaks, met his pupil, who shot
by him like the wind. Smirke’s pony shied, as the other thundered past
him; the gentle curate went over his head among the stinging-nettles in
the hedge. Pen laughed as they met, pointed towards the Baymouth road,
and was gone half a mile in that direction before poor Smirke had picked
himself up.
Pen had resolved in his mind that he must see Foker that morning; he must
hear about her; know about her; be with somebody who knew her; and honest
Smirke, for his part, sitting up among the stinging-nettles, as his pony
cropped quietly in the hedge, thought dismally to himself, ought he to go
to Fairoaks now that his pupil was evidently gone away for the day. Yes,
he thought he might go, too. He might go and ask Mrs. Pendennis when
Arthur would be back; and hear Miss Laura her Watts’s Catechism. He got
up on the little pony--both were used to his slipping off--and advanced
upon the house from which his scholar had just rushed away in a
whirlwind.
Thus love makes fools of all of us, big and little; and the curate had
tumbled over head and heels in pursuit of it, and Pen had started in the
first heat of the mad race.
CHAPTER V
Mrs. Haller at Home
Without slackening her pace, Rebecca the mare galloped on to Baymouth,
where Pen put her up at the inn stables, and ran straightway to Mr.
Foker’s lodgings, which he knew from the direction given to him by thatgentleman on the previous day. On reaching these apartments, which were
over a chemist’s shop whose stock of cigars and sodawater went off
rapidly by the kind patronage of his young inmates, Pen only found Mr.
Spavin, Foker’s friend, and part owner of the tandem which the latter had
driven into Chatteris, who was smoking, and teaching a little dog, a
friend of his, tricks with a bit of biscuit.
Pen’s healthy red face, fresh from the gallop, compared oddly with the
waxy debauched little features of Foker’s chum; the latter remarked it.
"Who’s that man?" he thought, "he looks as fresh as a bean. His hand
don’t shake of a morning, I’d bet five to one."
Foker had not come home at all. Here was a disappointment!--Mr. Spavin
could not say when his friend would return. Sometimes he stopped a day,
sometimes a week. Of what college was Pen? Would he have anything? There
was a very fair tap of ale. Mr. Spavin was enabled to know Pendennis’s
name, on the card which the latter took out and laid down (perhaps Pen in
these days was rather proud of having a card)--and so the young men took
leave.
Then Pen went down the rock, and walked about on the sand, biting his
nails by the shore of the much-sounding sea. It stretched before him
bright and immeasurable. The blue waters came rolling into the bay,
foaming and roaring hoarsely: Pen looked them in the face with blank
eyes, hardly regarding them. What a tide there was pouring into the lad’s
own mind at the time, and what a little power had he to check it! Pen
flung stones into the sea, but it still kept coming on. He was in a rage
at not seeing Foker. He wanted to see Foker. He must see Foker. "Suppose
I go on--on the Chatteris road, just to see if I can meet him," Pen
thought. Rebecca was saddled in another half hour, and galloping on the
grass by the Chatteris road. About four miles from Baymouth, the
Clavering road branches off, as everybody knows, and the mare naturally
was for taking that turn, but, cutting her over the shoulder, Pen passed
the turning, and rode on to the turnpike without seeing any sign of the
black tandem and red wheels.
As he was at the turnpike he might as well go on: that was quite clear.
So Pen rode to the George, and the hostler told him that Mr. Foker was
there sure enough, and that "he’d been a makin a tremendous row the night
afore, a drinkin and a singin, and wanting to fight Tom the postboy:
which I’m thinking he’d have had the worst of it," the man added, with a
grin. "Have you carried up your master’s ’ot water to shave with?" he
added, in a very satirical manner, to Mr. Foker’s domestic, who here came
down the yard bearing his master’s clothes, most beautifully brushed and
arranged. "Show Mr. Pendennis up to ’un," and Pen followed the man at
last to the apartment, where, in the midst of an immense bed, Mr. Harry
Foker lay reposing.
The feather bed and bolsters swelled up all round Mr. Foker, so that you
could hardly see his little sallow face and red silk nightcap.
"Hullo!" said Pen."Who goes there? brother, quickly tell!" sang out the voice from the bed.
"What! Pendennis again? Is your Mamma acquainted with your absence? Did
you sup with us last night? No stop--who supped with us last night,
Stoopid?"
"There was the three officers, sir, and Mr. Bingley, sir, and Mr.
Costigan, sir," the man answered, who received all Mr. Foker’s remarks
with perfect gravity.
"Ah yes: the cup and merry jest went round. We chanted and I remember I
wanted to fight a postboy. Did I thrash him, Stoopid?"
"No, sir. Fight didn’t come off, sir," said Stoopid, still with perfect
gravity. He was arranging Mr. Foker’s dressing-case--a trunk, the gift of
a fond mother, without which the young fellow never travelled. It
contained a prodigious apparatus in plate; a silver dish, a silver mug,
silver boxes and bottles for all sorts of essences, and a choice of
razors ready against the time when Mr. Foker’s beard should come.
"Do it some other day," said the young fellow, yawning and throwing up
his little lean arms over his head. "No, there was no fight; but there
was chanting. Bingley chanted, I chanted, the General chanted--Costigan I
mean.--Did you ever hear him sing ’The Little Pig under the Bed,’ Pen?"
"The man we met yesterday," said Pen, all in a tremor, "the father
of---"
"Of the Fotheringay,--the very man. Ain’t she a Venus, Pen?"
"Please sir, Mr. Costigan’s in the sittin-room, sir, and says, sir, you
asked him to breakfast, sir. Called five times, sir; but wouldn’t wake
you on no account; and has been here since eleven o’clock, sir---"
"How much is it now?"
"One, sir."
"What would the best of mothers say," cried the little sluggard, "if she
saw me in bed at this hour? She sent me down here with a grinder. She
wants me to cultivate my neglected genus--He, be! I say, Pen, this isn’t
quite like seven o’clock school,--is it, old boy?"--and the young fellow
burst out into a boyish laugh of enjoyment. Then he added--"Go in and
talk to the General whilst I dress. And I say, Pendennis, ask him to sing
you ’The Little Pig under the Bed;’ it’s capital." Pen went off in great
perturbation, to meet Mr. Costigan, and Mr. Foker commenced his toilet.
Of Mr. Foker’s two grandfathers, the one from whom he inherited a fortune
was a brewer; the other was an earl, who endowed him with the most doting
mother in the world. The Fokers had been at the Cistercian school from
father to son; at which place, our friend, whose name could be seen over
the playground wall, on a public-house sign, under which ’Foker’s Entire’
was painted, had been dreadfully bullied on account of his trade, his
uncomely countenance, his inaptitude for learning and cleanliness, hisgluttony and other weak points. But those who know how a susceptible
youth, under the tyranny of his schoolfellows, becomes silent and a
sneak, may understand how in a very few months after his liberation from
bondage, he developed himself as he had done; and became the humorous,
the sarcastic, the brilliant Foker, with whom we have made acquaintance.
A dunce he always was, it is true; for learning cannot be acquired by
leaving school and entering at college as a fellow-commoner; but he was
now (in his own peculiar manner) as great a dandy as he before had been a
slattern, and when he entered his sitting-room to join his two guests,
arrived scented and arrayed in fine linen, and perfectly splendid in
appearance.
General or Captain Costigan--for the latter was the rank which he
preferred to assume--was seated in the window with the newspaper held
before him at arm’s length. The Captain’s eyes were somewhat dim; and he
was spelling the paper, with the help of his lips, as well as of those
bloodshot eyes of his, as you see gentlemen do to whom reading is a rare
and difficult occupation. His hat was cocked very much on one ear; and as
one of his feet lay up in the window-seat, the observer of such matters
might remark, by the size and shabbiness of the boots which the Captain
wore, that times did not go very well with him. Poverty seems as if it
were disposed, before it takes possession of a man entirely, to attack
his extremities first: the coverings of his head, feet, and hands are its
first prey. All these parts of the Captain’s person were particularly
rakish and shabby. As soon as he saw Pen he descended from the
window-seat and saluted the new-comer, first in a military manner, by
conveying a couple of his fingers (covered with a broken black glove) to
his hat, and then removing that ornament altogether. The Captain was
inclined to be bald, but he brought a quantity of lank iron-grey hair
over his pate, and had a couple of whisps of the same falling down on
each side of his face. Much whisky had spoiled what complexion Mr.
Costigan may have possessed in his youth. His once handsome face had now
a copper tinge. He wore a very high stock, scarred and stained in many
places; and a dress-coat tightly buttoned up in those parts where the
buttons had not parted company from the garment.
"The young gentleman to whom I had the honour to be introjuiced yesterday
in the Cathadral Yard," said the Captain, with a splendid bow and wave of
his hat. "I hope I see you well, sir. I marked ye in the thayatre last
night during me daughter’s perfawrumance; and missed ye on my return. I
did but conduct her home, sir, for Jack Costigan, though poor, is a
gentleman; and when I reintered the house to pay me respects to me joyous
young friend, Mr. Foker--ye were gone. We had a jolly night of ut, sir--
Mr. Foker, the three gallant young dragoons, and your ’umble servant.
Gad, sir, it put me in mind of one of our old nights when I bore His
Majesty’s commission in the Foighting Hundtherd and Third." And he pulled
out an old snuff box, which he presented with a stately air to his new
acquaintance.
Arthur was a great deal too much flurried to speak. This shabby-looking
buck was--was her father. The Captain was perfumed with the recollections
of the last night’s cigars, and pulled and twisted the tuft on his chin
as jauntily as any young dandy."I hope, Miss F--, Miss Costigan is well, sir," Pen said, flushing up.
"She--she gave me greater pleasure, than--than I--I--I ever enjoyed at a
play. I think, sir--I think she’s the finest actress in the world," he
gasped out.
"Your hand, young man! for ye speak from your heart," cried the Captain.
"Thank ye, sir, an old soldier and a fond father thanks ye. She is the
finest actress in the world. I’ve seen the Siddons, sir, and the O’Nale--
they were great, but what were they compared to Miss Fotheringay? I do
not wish she should ashume her own name while on the stage. Me family,
sir, are proud people; and the Costigans of Costiganstown think that an
honest man, who has borne Her Majesty’s colours in the Hundred and Third,
would demean himself, by permitting his daughter to earn her old father’s
bread."
"There cannot be a more honourable duty, surely," Pen said.
"Honourable! Bedad, sir, I’d like to see the man who said Jack Costigan
would consent to anything dishonourable. I have a heart, sir, though I am
poor; I like a man who has a heart. You have: I read it in your honest
face and steady eye. And would you believe it"? he added, after a pause,
and with a pathetic whisper, "that that Bingley who has made his fortune
by me child, gives her but two guineas a week: out of which she finds
herself in dresses, and which, added to me own small means, makes our
all?"
Now the Captain’s means were so small as to be, it may be said, quite
invisible. But nobody knows how the wind is tempered to shorn Irish
lambs, and in what marvellous places they find pasture. If Captain
Costigan, whom I had the honour to know, would but have told his history,
it would have been a great moral story. But he neither would have told it
if he could, nor could if he would; for the Captain was not only
unaccustomed to tell the truth,--he was unable even to think it--and fact
and fiction reeled together in his muzzy, whiskified brain.
He began life rather brilliantly with a pair of colours, a fine person
and legs, and one of the most beautiful voices in the world. To his
latest day he sang with admirable pathos and humour those wonderful Irish
ballads which are so mirthful and so melancholy: and was always the first
himself to cry at their pathos. Poor Cos! he was at once brave and
maudlin, humorous and an idiot; always good-natured, and sometimes almost
trustworthy. Up to the last day of his life he would drink with any man,
and back any man’s bill: and his end was in a spunging-house, where the
sheriff’s officer, who took him, was fond of him.
In his brief morning of life, Cos formed the delight of regimental
messes, and had the honour of singing his songs, bacchanalian and
sentimental, at the tables of the most illustrious generals and
commanders-in-chief, in the course of which period he drank three times
as much claret as was good for him, and spent his doubtful patrimony.
What became of him subsequently to his retirement from the army, is no
affair of ours. I take it, no foreigner understands the life of an Irishgentleman without money, the way in which he manages to keep afloat--the
wind-raising conspiracies, in which he engages with heroes as unfortunate
as himself--the means by which he contrives, during most days of the
week, to get his portion of whisky-and-water: all these are mysteries to
us inconceivable: but suffice it to say, that through all the storms of
life Jack had floated somehow, and the lamp of his nose had never gone
out.
Before he and Pen had had a half-hour’s conversation, the Captain managed
to extract a couple of sovereigns from the young gentleman for tickets
for his daughter’s benefit, which was to take place speedily; and was not
a bona fide transaction such as that of the last year, when poor Miss
Fotheringay had lost fifteen shillings by her venture; but was an
arrangement with the manager, by which the lady was to have the sale of a
certain number of tickets, keeping for herself a large portion of the sum
for which they were sold.
Pen had but two pounds in his purse, and he handed them over to the
Captain for the tickets; he would have been afraid to offer more lest he
should offend the latter’s delicacy. Costigan scrawled him an order for a
box, lightly slipped the sovereigns into his waistcoat, and slapped his
hand over the place where they lay. They seemed to warm his old sides.
"Faith, sir," said he, "the bullion’s scarcer with me than it used to be,
as is the case with many a good fellow. I won six hundthred of ’em in a
single night, sir, when me kind friend, His Royal Highness the Duke of
Kent, was in Gibralther." And he straightway poured out to Pen a series
of stories regarding the claret drunk, the bets made, the races ridden by
the garrison there, with which he kept the young gentleman amused until
the arrival of their host and his breakfast.
Then it was good to see the Captain’s behaviour before the devilled
turkey and the mutton chops! His stories poured forth unceasingly, and
his spirits rose as he chatted to the young men. When he got a bit of
sunshine, the old lazzarone basked in it; he prated about his own affairs
and past splendour, and all the lords, generals, and Lord-Lieutenants he
had ever known. He described the death of his darling Bessie, the late
Mrs. Costigan, and the challenge he had sent to Captain Shanty Clancy, of
the Slashers, for looking rude at Miss Fotheringay as she was on her kyar
in the Phaynix; and then he described how the Captain apologised, gave a
dinner at the Kildare Street, where six of them drank twinty-one bottles
of claret, etc. He announced that to sit with two such noble and generous
young fellows was the happiness and pride of an old soldier’s existence;
and having had a second glass of Curacoa, was so happy that he began to
cry. Altogether we should say that the Captain was not a man of much
strength of mind, or a very eligible companion for youth; but there are
worse men, holding much better places in life, and more dishonest, who
have never committed half so many rogueries as he. They walked out, the
Captain holding an arm of each of his dear young friends, and in a
maudlin state of contentment. He winked at one or two tradesmen’s shops
where, possibly, he owed a bill, as much as to say, "See the company I’m
in--sure I’ll pay you, my boy,"--and they parted finally with Mr. Foker
at a billiard-room, where the latter had a particular engagement withsome gentlemen of Colonel Swallowtail’s regiment.
Pen and the shabby Captain still walked the street together; the Captain,
in his sly way, making inquiries about Mr. Foker’s fortune and station in
life. Pen told him how Foker’s father was a celebrated brewer, and his
mother was Lady Agnes Milton, Lord Rosherville’s daughter. The Captain
broke out into a strain of exaggerated compliment and panegyric about Mr.
Foker, whose "native aristocracie," he said, "could be seen with the
twinkling of an oi--and only served to adawrun other qualities which he
possessed, a foin intellect and a generous heart,"--in not one word of
which speech did the Captain accurately believe.
Pen walked on, listening to his companion’s prate, wondering, amused, and
puzzled. It had not as yet entered into the boy’s head to disbelieve any
statement that was made to him; and being of a candid nature himself, he
took naturally for truth what other people told him. Costigan had never
had a better listener, and was highly flattered by the attentiveness and
modest bearing of the young man.
So much pleased was he with the young gentleman, so artless, honest, and
cheerful did Pen seem to be, that the Captain finally made him an
invitation, which he very seldom accorded to young men, and asked Pen if
he would do him the fever to enter his humble abode, which was near at
hand, where the Captain would have the honour of inthrojuicing his young
friend to his daughther, Miss Fotheringay?
Pen was so delightfully shocked at this invitation, and was so stricken
down by the happiness thus suddenly offered to him, that he thought he
should have dropped from the Captain’s arm at first, and trembled lest
the other should discover his emotion. He gasped out a few incoherent
words, indicative of the high gratification he should have in being
presented to the lady for whose--for whose talents he had conceived such
an admiration--such an extreme admiration; and followed the Captain,
scarcely knowing whither that gentleman led him. He was going to see her!
He was going to see her! In her was the centre of the universe. She was
the kernel of the world for Pen. Yesterday, before he knew her, seemed a
period ever so long ago--a revolution was between him and that time, and
a new world about to begin.
The Captain conducted his young friend to that quiet little street in
Chatteris, which is called Prior’s Lane, which lies in the ecclesiastical
quarter of the town, close by Dean’s Green and the canons’ houses, and is
overlooked by the enormous towers of the cathedral; there the Captain
dwelt modestly in the first floor of a low gabled house, on the door of
which was the brass plate of ’Creed, Tailor and Robe-maker.’ Creed was
dead, however. His widow was a pew-opener in the cathedral hard by; his
eldest son was a little scamp of a choir-boy, who played toss-halfpenny,
led his little brothers into mischief, and had a voice as sweet as an
angel. A couple of the latter were sitting on the door-step, down which
you went into the passage of the house; and they jumped up with great
alacrity to meet their lodger, and plunged wildly, and rather to Pen’s
surprise, at the swallow-tails of the Captain’s dress-coat; for the truth
is, that the good-natured gentleman, when he was in cash, generallybrought home an apple or a piece of gingerbread for these children.
"Whereby the widdy never pressed me for rint when not convanient," as he
remarked afterwards to Pen, winking knowingly, and laying a finger on his
nose.
Pen tumbled down the step, and as he followed his companion up the
creaking old stair, his knees trembled under him. He could hardly see
when he entered, following the Captain, and stood in the room--in her
room. He saw something black before him, and waving as if making a
curtsey, and heard, but quite indistinctly, Costigan making a speech over
him, in which the Captain, with his usual magniloquence, expressed to "me
child" his wish to make her known to "his dear and admirable young
friend, Mr. Awther Pindinnis, a young gentleman of property in the
neighbourhood, a person of refoined moind, and enviable manners, a
sincare lover of poethry, and a man possest of a feeling and affectionate
heart."
"It is very fine weather," Miss Fotheringay said, in an Irish accent, and
with a deep rich melancholy voice.
"Very," said Mr. Pendennis. In this romantic way their conversation
began; and he found himself seated on a chair, and having leisure to look
at the young lady.
She looked still handsomer off the stage, than before the lamps. All her
attitudes were naturally grand and majestical. If she went and stood up
against the mantelpiece her robe draped itself classically round her; her
chin supported itself on her hand, the other lines of her form arranged
themselves in full harmonious undulations--she looked like a Muse in
contemplation. If she sate down on a cane-bottomed chair, her arm rounded
itself over the back of the seat, her hand seemed as if it ought to have
a sceptre put into it, the folds of her dress fell naturally round her in
order, like ladies of honour round a throne, and she looked like an
empress. All her movements were graceful and imperial. In the morning you
could see her hair was blue-black, her complexion of dazzling fairness,
with the faintest possible blush flickering, as it were, in her cheek.
Her eyes were grey, with prodigious long lashes; and as for her mouth,
Mr. Pendennis has given me subsequently to understand, that it was of a
staring red colour, with which the most brilliant geranium, sealing-wax,
or Guardsman’s coat, could not vie.
"And very warm," continued this empress and Queen of Sheba.
Mr. Pen again assented, and the conversation rolled on in this manner.
She asked Costigan whether he had had a pleasant evening at the George,
and he recounted the supper and the tumblers of punch. Then the father
asked her how she had been employing the morning.
"Bows came," said she, "at ten, and we studied Ophalia. It’s for the
twenty-fourth, when I hope, sir, we shall have the honour of seeing ye."
"Indeed, indeed, you will," Mr. Pendennis cried; wondering that she
should say ’Ophalia,’ and speak with an Irish inflection of voicenaturally, who had not the least Hibernian accent on the stage.
"I’ve secured ’um for your benefit, dear," said the Captain, tapping his
waistcoat pocket, wherein lay Pen’s sovereigns, and winking at Pen, with
one eye, at which the boy blushed.
"Mr---the gentleman’s very obleging," said Mrs. Haller.
"My name is Pendennis," said Pen, blushing. "I--I--hope you’ll--you’ll
remember it." His heart thumped so as he made this audacious declaration,
that he almost choked in uttering it.
"Pendennis"--she answered slowly, and looking him full in the eyes, with
a glance, so straight, so clear, so bright, so killing, with a voice so
sweet, so round, so low, that the word and the glance shot Pen through
and through, and perfectly transfixed him with pleasure.
"I never knew the name was so pretty before," Pen said.
"’Tis a very pretty name," Ophelia said. "Pentweazle’s not a pretty name.
Remember, papa, when we were on the Norwich Circuit, Young Pentweazle,
who used to play second old men, and married Miss Rancy, the Columbine;
they’re both engaged in London now, at the Queen’s, and get five pounds a
week. Pentweazle wasn’t his real name. ’Twas Judkin gave it him, I don’t
know why. His name was Harrington; that is, his real name was Potts;
fawther a clergyman, very respectable. Harrington was in London, and got
in debt. Ye remember; he came out in Falkland, to Mrs. Bunce’s Julia."
"And a pretty Julia she was," the Captain interposed; "a woman of fifty,
and a mother of ten children. ’Tis you ought to have been Julia, or my
name’s not Jack Costigan."
"I didn’t take the leading business then," Miss Fotheringay said
modestly; "I wasn’t fit for’t till Bows taught me."
"True for you, my dear," said the Captain: and bending to Pendennis,
he added, "Rejuiced in circumstances, sir, I was for some time a
fencing-master in Dublin (there’s only three men in the empire could
touch me with the foil once, but Jack Costigan’s getting old and stiff
now, sir), and my daughter had an engagement at the thayater there; and
’twas there that my friend, Mr. Bows, who saw her capabilities, and is an
uncommon ’cute man, gave her lessons in the dramatic art, and made her
what ye see. What have ye done since Bows went, Emily?"
"Sure, I’ve made a pie," Emily said, with perfect simplicity. She
pronounced it "Poy."
"If ye’ll try it at four o’clock, sir, say the word," said Costigan
gallantly. "That girl, sir, makes the best veal and ham pie in England,
and I think I can promise ye a glass of punch of the right flavour."
Pen had promised to be at home to dinner at six o’clock, but the rascal
thought he could accommodate pleasure and duty in this point, and wasonly too eager to accept this invitation. He looked on with delight and
wonder whilst Ophelia busied herself about the room, and prepared for the
dinner. She arranged the glasses, and laid and smoothed the little cloth,
all which duties she performed with a quiet grace and good humour, which
enchanted her guest more and more. The "poy" arrived from the baker’s in
the hands of one of the little choir-boy’s brothers at the proper hour:
and at four o’clock Pen found himself at dinner--actually at dinner with
the greatest tragic actress in the world, and her father--with the
handsomest woman in all creation--with his first and only love, whom he
had adored ever since when?--ever since yesterday, ever since for ever.
He ate a crust of her making, he poured her out a glass of beer, he saw
her drink a glass of punch--just one wine-glass full--out of the tumbler
which she mixed for her papa. She was perfectly good-natured, and offered
to mix one for Pendennis too. It was prodigiously strong; Pen had never
in his life drunk so much spirits and water. Was it the punch, or the
punch-maker who intoxicated him?
During dinner, when the Captain, whom his daughter treated most
respectfully, ceased prattling about himself and his adventures, Pen
tried to engage the Fotheringay in conversation about poetry and about
her profession. He asked her what she thought of Ophelia’s madness, and
whether she was in love with Hamlet or not? "In love with such a little
ojous wretch as that stunted manager of a Bingley?" She bristled with
indignation at the thought. Pen explained it was not of her he spoke, but
of Ophelia of the play. "Oh, indeed; if no offence was meant, none was
taken: but as for Bingley, indeed, she did not value him--not that glass
of punch." Pen next tried her on Kotzebue. "Kotzebue? who was he?"--"The
author of the play in which she had been performing so admirably." "She
did not know that--the man’s name at the beginning of the book was
Thompson," she said. Pen laughed at her adorable simplicity. He told her
of the melancholy fate of the author of the play, and how Sand had killed
him. It was for the first time in her life that Miss Costigan had ever
heard of Mr. Kotzebue’s existence, but she looked as if she was very much
interested, and her sympathy sufficed for honest Pen.
And in the midst of this simple conversation, the hour and a quarter
which poor Pen could afford to allow himself, passed away only too
quickly; and he had taken leave, he was gone, and away on his rapid road
homewards on the back of Rebecca. She was called upon to show her mettle
in the three journeys which she made that day.
"What was that he was talking about, the madness of Hamlet, and the
theory of the great German critic on the subject?" Emily asked of her
father.
"’Deed then I don’t know, Milly dear," answered the Captain. "We’ll ask
Bows when he comes."
"Anyhow, he’s a nice, fair-spoken pretty young man," the lady said: "how
many tickets did he take of you?"
"Faith, then, he took six, and gev me two guineas, Milly," the Captain
said. "I suppose them young chaps is not too flush of coin.""He’s full of book-learning," Miss Fotheringay continued. "Kotzebue! He,
he, what a droll name indeed, now; and the poor fellow killed by Sand,
too! Did ye ever hear such a thing? I’ll ask Bows about it, papa, dear."
"A queer death, sure enough," ejaculated the Captain, and changed the
painful theme. "’Tis an elegant mare the young gentleman rides," Costigan
went on to say; "and a grand breakfast, intirely, that young Mister Foker
gave us."
"He’s good for two private boxes, and at leest twenty tickets, I should
say," cried the daughter, a prudent lass, who always kept her fine eyes
on the main chance.
"I’ll go bail of that," answered the papa, and so their conversation
continued awhile, until the tumbler of punch was finished; and their hour
of departure soon came, too; for at half-past six Miss Fotheringay was to
appear at the theatre again, whither her father always accompanied her;
and stood, as we have seen, in the side-scene watching her, and drank
spirits-and-water in the green-room with the company there.
"How beautiful she is," thought Pen, cantering homewards. "How simple and
how tender! How charming it is to see a woman of her commanding genius
busying herself with the delightful, though humble, offices of domestic
life, cooking dishes to make her old father comfortable, and brewing
drink for him with her delicate fingers! How rude it was of me to begin
to talk about professional matters, and how well she turned the
conversation! By the way, she talked about professional matters herself;
but then with what fun and humour she told the story of her comrade,
Pentweazle, as he was called! There is no humour like Irish humour. Her
father is rather tedious, but thoroughly amiable; and how fine of him,
giving lessons in fencing after he quitted the army, where he was the pet
of the Duke of Kent! Fencing! I should like to continue my fencing, or I
shall forget what Angelo taught me. Uncle Arthur always liked me to fence
--he says it is the exercise of a gentleman. Hang it. I’ll take some
lessons of Captain Costigan. Go along, Rebecca--up the hill, old lady.
Pendennis, Pendennis--how she spoke the word! Emily, Emily! how good, how
noble, how beautiful, how perfect, she is!"
Now the reader, who has had the benefit of overhearing the entire
conversation which Pen had with Miss Fotheringay, can judge for himself
about the powers of her mind, and may perhaps be disposed to think that
she has not said anything astonishingly humorous or intellectual in the
course of the above interview. She has married, and taken her position in
the world as the most spotless and irreproachable lady since, and I have
had the pleasure of making her acquaintance: and must certainly own,
against my friend Pen’s opinion, that his adored Emily is not a clever
woman. The truth is, she had not only never heard of Kotzebue, but she
had never heard of Farquhar, or Congreve, or any dramatist in whose plays
she had not a part: and of these dramas she only knew the part which
concerned herself. A wag once told her that Dante was born at Algiers:
and asked her,--which Dr. Johnson wrote first, ’Irene,’ or ’Every Man in
his Humour.’ But she had the best of the joke, for she had never heard ofIrene or Every Man in his Humour, or Dante, or perhaps Algiers. It was
all one to her. She acted what little Bows told her--where he told her to
sob, she sobbed--where he told her to laugh, she laughed. She gave the
tirade or the repartee without the slightest notion of its meaning. She
went to church and goes every Sunday, with a reputation perfectly intact,
and was (and is) as guiltless of sense as of any other crime.
But what did our Pen know of these things? He saw a pair of bright eyes,
and he believed in them--a beautiful image, and he fell down and
worshipped it. He supplied the meaning which her words wanted; and
created the divinity which he loved. Was Titania the first who fell in
love with an ass, or Pygmalion the only artist who has gone crazy about a
stone? He had found her; he had found what his soul thirsted after. He
flung himself into the stream and drank with all his might. Let those say
who have been thirsty once how delicious that first draught is. As he
rode down the avenue towards home--Pen shrieked with laughter as he saw
the Reverend Mr. Smirke once more coming demurely away from Fairoaks on
his pony. Smirke had dawdled and stayed at the cottages on the way, and
then dawdled with Laura over her lessons--and then looked at Mrs.
Pendennis’s gardens and improvements until he had perfectly bored out
that lady: and he had taken his leave at the very last minute without
that invitation to dinner which he fondly expected.
Pen was full of kindness and triumph. "What, picked up and sound?" he
cried out laughing. "Come along back, old fellow, and eat my dinner--I
have had mine: but we will have a bottle of the old wine and drink her
health, Smirke."
Poor Smirke turned the pony’s head round, and jogged along with Arthur.
His mother was charmed to see him in such high spirits, and welcomed Mr.
Smirke for his sake, when Arthur said he had forced the curate back to
dine. He gave a most ludicrous account of the play of the night before,
and of the acting of Bingley the Manager, in his rickety Hessians, and
the enormous Mrs. Bingley as the Countess, in rumpled green satin and a
Polish cap; he mimicked them, and delighted his mother and little Laura,
who clapped her hands with pleasure.
"And Mrs. Haller?" said Mrs. Pendennis.
"She’s a stunner, ma’am," Pen said, laughing, and using the words of his
revered friend, Mr. Foker.
"A what, Arthur?" asked the lady.
"What is a stunner, Arthur?" cried Laura, in the same voice.
So he gave them a queer account of Mr. Foker, and how he used to be
called Vats and Grains, and by other contumelious names at school: and
how he was now exceedingly rich, and a Fellow Commoner at St. Boniface.
But gay and communicative as he was, Mr. Pen did not say one syllable
about his ride to Chatteris that day, or about the new friends whom he
had made there.When the two ladies retired, Pen, with flashing eyes, filled up two great
bumpers of Madeira, and looking Smirke full in the face said, "Here’s to
her!"
"Here’s to her," said the curate with a sigh, lifting the glass and
emptying it, so that his face was a little pink when he put it down.
Pen had even less sleep that night than on the night before. In the
morning, and almost before dawn, he went out and saddled that unfortunate
Rebecca himself, and rode her on the Downs like mad. Again Love had
roused him--and said, "Awake, Pendennis, I am here." That charming fever
--that delicious longing--and fire, and uncertainty; he hugged them to
him--be would not have lost them for all the world.
CHAPTER VI
Contains both Love and War
Cicero and Euripides did not occupy Mr. Pen much for some time after
this, and honest Mr. Smirke had a very easy time with his pupil. Rebecca
was the animal who suffered most in the present state of Pen’s mind, for,
besides those days when he could publicly announce his intention of going
to Chatteris to take a fencing-lesson, and went thither with the
knowledge of his mother, whenever he saw three hours clear before him,
the young rascal made a rush for the city, and found his way to Prior’s
Lane. He was as frantic with vexation when Rebecca went lame, as Richard
at Bosworth, when his horse was killed under him: and got deeply into the
books of the man who kept the hunting-stables at Chatteris for the
doctoring of his own, and the hire of another animal.
Then, and perhaps once in a week, under pretence of going to read a Greek
play with Smirke, this young reprobate set off so as to be in time for
the Competitor down coach, stayed a couple of hours in Chatteris, and
returned on the Rival which left for London at ten at night. Once his
secret was nearly lost by Smirke’s simplicity, of whom Mrs. Pendennis
asked whether they had read a great deal the night before, or a question
to that effect. Smirke was about to tell the truth, that he had never
seen Mr. Pen at all, when the latter’s boot-heel came grinding down on
Mr. Smirke’s toe under the table, and warned the curate not to betray
him.
They had had conversations on the tender subject, of course. It is good
sport (if you are not yourself engaged in the conversation) to hear two
men in love talk. There must be a confidant and depositary somewhere.
When informed, under the most solemn vows of secrecy, of Pen’s condition
of mind, the curate said, with no small tremor, "that he hoped it was no
unworthy object--no unlawful attachment, which Pen had formed"--for if
so, the poor fellow felt it would be his duty to break his vow and inform
Pen’s mother, and then there would be a quarrel, he felt, with sickeningapprehension, and he would never again have a chance of seeing what he
most liked in the world.
"Unlawful, unworthy!" Pen bounced out at the curate’s question. "She is
as pure as she is beautiful; I would give my heart to no other woman. I
keep the matter a secret in my family, because--because--there are
reasons of a weighty nature which I am not at liberty to disclose. But
any man who breathes a word against her purity insults both her honour
and mine, and--and dammy, I won’t stand it."
Smirke, with a faint laugh, only said, "Well, well, don’t call me out,
Arthur, for you know I can’t fight;" but by this compromise the wretched
curate was put more than ever into the power of his pupil, and the Greek
and mathematics suffered correspondingly.
If the reverend gentleman had had much discernment, and looked into the
Poet’s Corner of the County Chronicle, as it arrived in the Wednesday’s
bag, he might have seen ’Mrs. Haller,’ ’Passion and Genius,’ ’Lines to
Miss Fotheringay, of the Theatre Royal,’ appearing every week; and other
verses of the most gloomy, thrilling, and passionate cast. But as these
poems were no longer signed NEP by their artful composer, but subscribed
EROS, neither the tutor nor Helen, the good soul, who cut all her son’s
verses out of the paper, knew that Nep was no other than that flaming
Eros, who sang so vehemently the character of the new actress.
"Who is the lady," at last asked Mrs. Pendennis, "whom your rival is
always singing in the County Chronicle? He writes something like you,
dear Pen, but yours is much the best. Have you seen Miss Fotheringay?"
Pen said yes, he had; that night he went to see the "Stranger," she acted
Mrs. Haller. By the way, she was going to have a benefit, and was to
appear in Ophelia--suppose we were to go--Shakspeare, you know, mother--
we can get horses from the Clavering Arms. Little Laura sprang up with
delight, she longed for a play.
Pen introduced "Shakspeare, you know," because the deceased Pendennis, as
became a man of his character, professed an uncommon respect for the bard
of Avon, in whose works he safely said there was more poetry than in all
’Johnson’s Poets’ put together. And though Mr. Pendennis did not much
read the works in question, yet he enjoined Pen to peruse them, and often
said what pleasure he should have, when the boy was of a proper age, in
taking him and mother to see some good plays of the immortal poet.
The ready tears welled up in the kind mother’s eyes as she remembered
these speeches of the man who was gone. She kissed her son fondly, and
said she would go. Laura jumped for joy. Was Pen happy?--was he ashamed?
As he held his mother to him, he longed to tell her all, but he kept his
counsel. He would see how his mother liked her; the play should be the
thing, and he would try his mother like Hamlet’s.
Helen, in her good humour, asked Mr. Smirke to be of the party. That
ecclesiastic had been bred up by a fond parent at Clapham, who had an
objection to dramatic entertainments, and he had never yet seen a play.But, Shakspeare!--but to go with Mrs. Pendennis in her carriage, and sit
a whole night by her side!--he could not resist the idea of so much
pleasure, and made a feeble speech, in which he spoke of temptation and
gratitude, and finally accepted Mrs. Pendennis’s most kind offer. As he
spoke he gave her a look, which made her exceedingly uncomfortable. She
had seen that look more than once, of late, pursuing her. He became more
positively odious every day in the widow’s eyes.
We are not going to say a great deal about Pen’s courtship of Miss
Fotheringay, for the reader has already had a specimen of her
conversation, much of which need surely not be reported. Pen sate with
her hour after hour, and poured forth all his honest boyish soul to her.
Everything he knew, or hoped, or felt, or had read, or fancied, he told
to her. He never tired of talking and longing. One after another, as his
thoughts rose in his hot eager brain, he clothed them in words, and told
them to her. Her part of the tete-a-tete was not to talk, but to appear
as if she understood what Pen talked (a difficult matter, for the young
fellow blurted out no small quantity of nonsense), and to look
exceedingly handsome and sympathising. The fact is, whilst he was making
one of his tirades--and delighted, perhaps, and wondering at his own
eloquence, the lad would go on for twenty minutes at a time--the lovely
Emily, who could not comprehend a tenth part of his talk, had leisure to
think about her own affairs, and would arrange in her own mind how they
should dress the cold mutton, or how she would turn the black satin, or
make herself out of her scarf a bonnet like Miss Thackthwaite’s new one,
and so forth. Pen spouted Byron and Moore; passion and poetry: her
business was to throw up her eyes, or fixing them for a moment on his
face, to cry, "Oh, ’tis beautiful! Ah, how exquisite! Repeat those lines
again." And off the boy went, and she returned to her own simple thoughts
about the turned gown, or the hashed mutton.
In fact Pen’s passion was not long a secret from the lovely Emily or her
father. Upon his second visit, his admiration was quite evident to both
of them, and on his departure the old gentleman said to his daughter, as
he winked at her over his glass of grog, "Faith, Milly darling, I think
ye’ve hooked that chap."
"Pooh, ’tis only a boy, papa dear," Milly remarked. "Sure he’s but a
child." Pen would have been very much pleased if he had heard that
phrase--he was galloping home wild with pleasure, and shouting out her
name as he rode.
"Ye’ve hooked ’um any how," said the Captain, "and let me tell ye he’s
not a bad fish. I asked Tom at the George, and Flint, the grocer, where
his mother dales--fine fortune--drives in her chariot--splendid park and
grounds--Fairoaks Park--only son--property all his own at twenty-one--ye
might go further and not fare so well, Miss Fotheringay."
"Them boys are mostly talk," said Milly, seriously. "Ye know at Dublin
how ye went on about young Poldoody, and I’ve a whole desk full of verses
he wrote me when he was in Trinity College; but he went abroad, and his
mother married him to an Englishwoman.""Lord Poldoody was a young nobleman; and in them it’s natural: and ye
weren’t in the position in which ye are now, Milly dear. But ye mustn’t
encourage this young chap too much, for, bedad, Jack Costigan won’t have
any thrilling with his daughter."
"No more will his daughter, papa, you may be sure of that," Milly said.
"A little sip more of the punch,--sure, ’tis beautiful. Ye needn’t be
afraid about the young chap--I think I’m old enough to take care of
myself, Captain Costigan."
So Pen used to come day after day, rushing in and galloping away, and
growing more wild about the girl with every visit. Sometimes the Captain
was present at their meetings; but having a perfect confidence in his
daughter, he was more often inclined to leave the young couple to
themselves, and cocked his hat over his eye, and strutted off on some
errand when Pen entered. How delightful those interviews were! The
Captain’s drawing-room was a low wainscoted room, with a large window
looking into the Dean’s garden. There Pen sate and talked--and talked--
Emily, looking beautiful as she sate at her work--looking beautiful and
calm, and the sunshine came streaming in at the great windows, and
lighted up her superb face and form. In the midst of the conversation,
the great bell would begin to boom, and he would pause smiling, and be
silent until the sound of the vast music died away--or the rooks in the
cathedral elms would make a great noise towards sunset--or the sound of
the organ and the choristers would come over the quiet air, and gently
hush Pen’s talking.
By the way, it must be said that Miss Fotheringay, in a plain shawl and a
close bonnet and veil, went to church every Sunday of her life,
accompanied by her indefatigable father, who gave the responses in a very
rich and fine brogue, joined in the psalms and chanting, and behaved in
the most exemplary manner.
Little Bows, the house-friend of the family, was exceedingly wroth at the
notion of Miss Fotheringay’s marriage with a stripling seven or eight
years her junior. Bows, who was a cripple, and owned that he was a little
more deformed even than Bingley the manager, so that he could not appear
on the stage, was a singular wild man of no small talents and humour.
Attracted first by Miss Fotheringay’s beauty, he began to teach her how
to act. He shrieked out in his cracked voice the parts, and his pupil
learned them from his lips by rote, and repeated them in her full rich
tones. He indicated the attitudes, and set and moved those beautiful arms
of hers. Those who remember this grand actress on the stage can recall
how she used always precisely the same gestures, looks, and tones; how
she stood on the same plank of the stage in the same position, rolled her
eyes at the same instant and to the same degree, and wept with precisely
the same heart-rending pathos and over the same pathetic syllable. And
after she had come out trembling with emotion before the audience, and
looking so exhausted and tearful that you fancied she would faint with
sensibility, she would gather up her hair the instant she was behind the
curtain, and go home to a mutton-chop and a glass of brown stout; and the
harrowing labours of the day over, she went to bed and snored as
resolutely and as regularly as a porter.Bows then was indignant at the notion that his pupil should throw her
chances away in life by bestowing her hand upon a little country squire.
As soon as a London manager saw her he prophesied that she would get a
London engagement, and a great success. The misfortune was that the
London managers had seen her. She had played in London three years
before, and failed from utter stupidity. Since then it was that Bows had
taken her in hand and taught her part after part. How he worked and
screamed, and twisted, and repeated lines over and over again, and with
what indomitable patience and dulness she followed him! She knew that he
made her: and let herself be made. She was not grateful, or ungrateful,
or unkind, or ill-humoured. She was only stupid; and Pen was madly in
love with her.
The post-horses from the Clavering Arms arrived in due time, and carried
the party to the theatre at Chatteris, where Pen was gratified in
perceiving that a tolerably large audience was assembled. The young
gentlemen from Baymouth had a box, in the front of which sate Mr. Foker
and his friend Mr. Spavin, splendidly attired in the most full-blown
evening costume. They saluted Pen in a cordial manner, and examined his
party, of which they approved, for little Laura was a pretty little
red-cheeked girl with a quantity of shining brown ringlets, and Mrs.
Pendennis, dressed in black velvet with the diamond cross which she
sported on great occasions, looked uncommonly handsome and majestic.
Behind these sate Mr. Arthur, and the gentle Smirke with the curl
reposing on his fair forehead, and his white tie in perfect order. He
blushed to find himself in such a place--but how happy was he to be
there! He and Mrs. Pendennis brought books of ’Hamlet’ with them to
follow the tragedy, as is the custom of honest countryfolks who go to a
play in state. Samuel, coachman, groom, and gardener to Mr. Pendennis,
took his place in the pit, where Mr. Foker’s man was also visible. It was
dotted with non-commissioned officers of the Dragoons, whose band, by
kind permission of Colonel Swallowtail, were, as usual, in the orchestra;
and that corpulent and distinguished warrior himself, with his Waterloo
medal and a number of his young men, made a handsome show in the boxes.
"Who is that odd-looking person bowing to you, Arthur?" Mrs. Pendennis
asked of her son.
Pen blushed a great deal. "His name is Captain Costigan, ma’am," he said
--"a Peninsular officer." In fact it was the Captain in a new shoot of
clothes, as he called them, and with a large pair of white kid gloves,
one of which he waved to Pendennis, whilst he laid the other sprawling
over his heart and coat-buttons. Pen did not say any more. And how was
Mrs. Pendennis to know that Mr. Costigan was the father of Miss
Fotheringay?
Mr. Hornbull, from London, was the Hamlet of the night, Mr. Bingley
modestly contenting himself with the part of Horatio, and reserving his
chief strength for William in ’Black-Eyed Susan,’ which was the second
piece.
We have nothing to do with the play: except to say that Ophelia lookedlovely, and performed with admirable wild pathos laughing, weeping,
gazing wildly, waving her beautiful white arms, and flinging about her
snatches of flowers and songs with the most charming madness. What an
opportunity her splendid black hair had of tossing over her shoulders!
She made the most charming corpse ever seen; and while Hamlet and Laertes
were battling in her grave, she was looking out from the back scenes with
some curiosity towards Pen’s box, and the family party assembled in it.
There was but one voice in her praise there. Mrs. Pendennis was in
ecstasies with her beauty. Little Laura was bewildered by the piece, and
the Ghost, and the play within the play (during which, as Hamlet lay at
Ophelia’s knee, Pen felt that he would have liked to strangle Mr.
Hornbull), but cried out great praises of that beautiful young creature.
Pen was charmed with the effect which she produced on his mother--and the
clergyman, for his part, was exceedingly enthusiastic.
When the curtain fell upon that group of slaughtered personages, who are
despatched so suddenly at the end of ’Hamlet,’ and whose demise
astonished poor little Laura not a little, there was an immense shouting
and applause from all quarters of the house; the intrepid Smirke,
violently excited, clapped his hands, and cried out "Bravo, Bravo," as
loud as the Dragoon officers themselves. These were greatly moved,--ils
s’agitaient sur leurs bancs,--to borrow a phrase from our neighbours.
They were led cheering into action by the portly Swallowtail, who waved
his cap--the non-commissioned officers in the pit, of course, gallantly
following their chiefs. There was a roar of bravos rang through the
house; Pen bellowing with the loudest, "Fotheringay! Fotheringay!" and
Messrs. Spavin and Foker giving the view-halloo from their box. Even Mrs.
Pendennis began to wave about her pocket-handkerchief, and little Laura
danced, laughed, clapped, and looked up at Pen with wonder.
Hornbull led the beneficiaire forward, amidst bursts of enthusiasm--and
she looked so handsome and radiant, with her hair still over her
shoulders, that Pen hardly could contain himself for rapture: and he
leaned over his mother’s chair, and shouted, and hurrayed, and waved his
hat. It was all he could do to keep his secret from Helen, and not say,
"Look! That’s the woman! Isn’t she peerless? I tell you I love her." But
he disguised these feelings under an enormous bellowing and hurraying.
As for Miss Fotheringay and her behaviour, the reader is referred to a
former page for an account of that. She went through precisely the same
business. She surveyed the house all round with glances of gratitude; and
trembled, and almost sank with emotion, over her favourite trap-door. She
seized the flowers (Foker discharged a prodigious bouquet at her, and
even Smirke made a feeble shy with a rose, and blushed dreadfully when it
fell into the pit). She seized the flowers and pressed them to her
swelling heart--etc., etc.--in a word--we refer the reader to earlier
pages. Twinkling in her breast poor old Pen saw a locket which he had
bought of Mr. Nathan in High Street, with the last shilling he was worth,
and a sovereign borrowed from Smirke.
’Black-Eyed Susan’ followed, at which sweet story our gentle-hearted
friends were exceedingly charmed and affected: and in which Susan, with arusset gown and a pink ribbon in her cap, looked to the full as lovely as
Ophelia. Bingley was great in William. Goll, as the Admiral, looked like
the figure-head of a seventy-four; and Garbetts, as Captain Boldweather,
a miscreant who forms a plan for carrying off Black-eyed Susan, and
waving an immense cocked hat says, "Come what may, he will be the ruin of
her"--all these performed their parts with their accustomed talent; and
it was with a sincere regret that all our friends saw the curtain drop
down and end that pretty and tender story.
If Pen had been alone with his mother in the carriage as they went home,
he would have told her all, that night; but he sate on the box in the
moonshine smoking a cigar by the side of Smirke, who warmed himself with
a comforter. Mr. Foker’s tandem and lamps whirled by the sober old
Clavering posters as they were a couple of miles on their road home, and
Mr. Spavin saluted Mrs. Pendennis’s carriage with some considerable
variations of Rule Britannia on the key-bugle.
It happened two days after the above gaieties that Mr. Dean of Chatteris
entertained a few select clerical friends at dinner at his Deanery Home.
That they drank uncommonly good port wine, and abused the Bishop over
their dessert, are very likely matters: but with such we have nothing at
present to do. Our friend Doctor Portman, of Clavering, was one of the
Dean’s guests, and being a gallant man, and seeing from his place at the
mahogany the Dean’s lady walking up and down the grass, with her children
sporting around her, and her pink parasol over her lovely head--the
Doctor stept out of the French windows of the dining-room into the lawn,
which skirts that apartment, and left the other white neckcloths to gird
at my lord Bishop. Then the Doctor went up and offered Mrs. Dean his arm,
and they sauntered over the ancient velvet lawn, which had been mowed and
rolled for immemorial Deans, in that easy, quiet, comfortable manner, in
which people of middle age and good temper walk after a good dinner, in a
calm golden summer evening, when the sun has but just sunk behind the
enormous cathedral-towers, and the sickle-shaped moon is growing every
instant brighter in the heavens.
Now at the end of the Dean’s garden there is, as we have stated, Mrs.
Creed’s house, and the windows of the first-floor room were open to admit
the pleasant summer air. A young lady of six-and-twenty, whose eyes were
perfectly wide open, and a luckless boy of eighteen, blind with love and
infatuation, were in that chamber together; in which persons, as we have
before seen them in the same place, the reader will have no difficulty in
recognising Mr. Arthur Pendennis and Miss Costigan.
The poor boy had taken the plunge. Trembling with passionate emotion, his
heart beating and throbbing fiercely, tears rushing forth in spite of
him, his voice almost choking with feeling, poor Pen had said those words
which he could withhold no more, and flung himself and his whole store of
love, and admiration, and ardour at the feet of this mature beauty. Is he
the first who has done so? Have none before or after him staked all their
treasure of life, as a savage does his land and possessions against a
draught of the fair-skins’ fire-water, or a couple of bauble eyes?
"Does your mother know of this, Arthur?" said Miss Fotheringay, slowly.He seized her hand madly and kissed it a thousand times. She did not
withdraw it. "Does the old lady know it?" Miss Costigan thought to
herself, "well, perhaps she may," and then she remembered what a handsome
diamond cross Mrs. Pendennis had on the night of the play, and thought,
"Sure ’twill go in the family."
"Calm yourself, dear Arthur," she said, in her low rich voice, and
sniffled sweetly and gravely upon him. Then, with her disengaged hand,
she put the hair lightly off his throbbing forehead. He was in such a
rapture and whirl of happiness that he could hardly speak. At last he
gasped out, "My mother has seen you, and admires you beyond measure. She
will learn to love you soon: who can do otherwise? She will love you
because I do."
"’Deed then, I think you do," said Miss Costigan, perhaps with a sort of
pity for Pen.
Think she did! Of course here Mr. Pen went off into a rhapsody through
which, as we have perfect command over our own feelings, we have no
reason to follow the lad. Of course, love, truth, and eternity were
produced: and words were tried but found impossible to plumb the
tremendous depth of his affection. This speech, we say, is no business of
ours. It was most likely not very wise, but what right have we to
overhear? Let the poor boy fling out his simple heart at the woman’s
feet, and deal gently with him. It is best to love wisely, no doubt: but
to love foolishly is better than not to be able to love at all. Some of
us can’t: and are proud of our impotence too.
At the end of his speech Pen again kissed the imperial hand with rapture
--and I believe it was at this very moment, and while Mrs. Dean and
Doctor Portman were engaged in conversation, that young Master Ridley
Roset, her son, pulled his mother by the back of her capacious dress and
said--
"I say, ma! look up there"--and he waggled his innocent head.
That was, indeed, a view from the Dean’s garden such as seldom is seen by
Deans--or is written in Chapters. There was poor Pen performing a salute
upon the rosy fingers of his charmer, who received the embrace with
perfect calmness and good humour. Master Ridley looked up and grinned,
little Miss Rosa looked at her brother, and opened the mouth of
astonishment. Mrs. Dean’s countenance defied expression, and as for Dr.
Portman, when he beheld the scene, and saw his prime favourite and dear
pupil Pen, he stood mute with rage and wonder.
Mrs. Haller spied the party below at the same moment, and gave a start
and a laugh. "Sure there’s somebody in the Dean’s garden," she cried out;
and withdrew with perfect calmness, whilst Pen darted away with his face
glowing like coals. The garden party had re-entered the house when he
ventured to look out again. The sickle moon was blazing bright in the
heavens then, the stars were glittering, the bell of the cathedral
tolling nine, the Dean’s guests (all save one, who had called for his
horse Dumpling, and ridden off early) were partaking of tea and butteredcakes in Mrs. Dean’s drawing-room--when Pen took leave of Miss Costigan.
Pen arrived at home in due time afterwards, and was going to slip off to
bed, for the poor lad was greatly worn and agitated, and his high-strung
nerves had been at almost a maddening pitch when a summons came to him by
John the old footman, whose countenance bore a very ominous look, that
his mother must see him below.
On this he tied on his neckcloth again, and went downstairs to the
drawing-room. There sate not only his mother, but her friend, the
Reverend Doctor Portman. Helen’s face looked very pale by the light of
the lamp--the Doctor’s was flushed, on the contrary, and quivering with
anger and emotion.
Pen saw at once that there was a crisis, and that there had been a
discovery. "Now for it," he thought.
"Where have you been, Arthur?" Helen said in a trembling voice.
"How can you look that--that dear lady, and a Christian clergyman in the
face, sir?" bounced out the Doctor, in spite of Helen’s pale, appealing
looks. "Where has he been? Where his mother’s son should have been
ashamed to go. For your mother’s an angel, sir, an angel. How dare you
bring pollution into her house, and make that spotless creature wretched
with the thoughts of your crime?"
"Sir!" said Pen.
"Don’t deny it, sir," roared the Doctor. "Don’t add lies, sir, to your
other infamy. I saw you myself, sir. I saw you from the Dean’s garden. I
saw you kissing the hand of that infernal painted---"
"Stop," Pen said, clapping his fist on the table, till the lamp flickered
up and shook, "I am a very young man, but you will please to remember
that I am a gentleman--I will hear no abuse of that lady."
"Lady, sir," cried the Doctor, "that a lady--you--you--you stand in your
mother’s presence and call that--that woman a lady!---"
"In anybody’s presence," shouted out Pen. "She is worthy of any place.
She is as pure as any woman. She is as good as she is beautiful. If any
man but you insulted her, I would tell him what I thought; but as you are
my oldest friend, I suppose you have the privilege to doubt of my
honour."
"No, no, Pen, dearest Pen," cried out Helen in an excess of joy. "I told,
I told you, Doctor, he was not--not what you thought:" and the tender
creature coming trembling forward flung herself on Pen’s shoulder.
Pen felt himself a man, and a match for all the Doctors in Doctordom. He
was glad this explanation had come. "You saw how beautiful she was," he
said to his mother, with a soothing, protecting air, like Hamlet with
Gertrude in the play. "I tell you, dear mother, she is as good. When youknow her you will say so. She is of all, except you, the simplest, the
kindest, the most affectionate of women. Why should she not be on the
stage?--She maintains her father by her labour."
"Drunken old reprobate," growled the Doctor, but Pen did not hear or
heed.
"If you could see, as I have, how orderly her life is, how pure and pious
her whole conduct, you would--as I do--yes, as I do"--(with a savage look
at the Doctor)--"spurn the slanderer who dared to do her wrong. Her
father was an officer, and distinguished himself in Spain. He was a
friend of His Royal Highness the Duke of Kent, and is intimately known to
the Duke of Wellington, and some of the first officers of our army. He
has met my uncle Arthur at Lord Hill’s, he thinks. His own family is one
of the most ancient and respectable in Ireland, and indeed is as good as
our own. The Costigans were kings of Ireland."
"Why, God bless my soul," shrieked out the Doctor, hardly knowing whether
to burst with rage or laughter, "you don’t mean to say you want to marry
her?"
Pen put on his most princely air. "What else, Dr. Portman," he said, "do
you suppose would be my desire?"
Utterly foiled in his attack, and knocked down by this sudden lunge of
Pen’s, the Doctor could only gasp out, "Mrs. Pendennis, ma’am, send for
the Major."
"Send for the Major? with all my heart," said Arthur Prince of Pendennis
and Grand Duke of Fairoaks, with a most superb wave of the hand. And the
colloquy terminated by the writing of those two letters which were laid
on Major Pendennis’s breakfast-table, in London, at the commencement of
Prince Arthur’s most veracious history.
CHAPTER VII
In which the Major makes his Appearance
Our acquaintance, Major Arthur Pendennis, arrived in due time at
Fairoaks, after a dreary night passed in the mail-coach, where a stout
fellow-passenger, swelling preternaturally with great-coats, had crowded
him into a corner, and kept him awake by snoring indecently; where a
widow lady, opposite, had not only shut out the fresh air by closing all
the windows of the vehicle, but had filled the interior with fumes of
Jamaica rum and water, which she sucked perpetually from a bottle in her
reticule; where, whenever he caught a brief moment of sleep, the twanging
of the horn at the turnpike-gates, or the scuffling of his huge neighbour
wedging him closer and closer, or the play of the widow’s feet on his own
tender toes, speedily woke up the poor gentleman to the horrors andrealities of life--a life which has passed away now and become
impossible, and only lives in fond memories. Eight miles an hour, for
twenty or five-and-twenty hours, a tight mail-coach, a hard seat, a gouty
tendency, a perpetual change of coachmen grumbling because you did not
fee them enough, a fellow-passenger partial to spirits-and-water,--who
has not borne with these evils in the jolly old times? and how could
people travel under such difficulties? And yet they did, and were merry
too. Next the widow, and by the side of the Major’s servant on the roof,
were a couple of school-boys going home for the midsummer holidays, and
Major Pendennis wondered to see them sup at the inn at Bagshot, where
they took in a cargo of ham, eggs, pie, pickles, tea, coffee, and boiled
beef, which surprised the poor Major, sipping a cup of very feeble tea,
and thinking with a tender dejection that Lord Steyne’s dinner was coming
off at that very moment. The ingenuous ardour of the boys, however,
amused the Major, who was very good-natured, and he became the more
interested when he found that the one who travelled inside with him was a
lord’s son, whose noble father Pendennis, of course, had met in the world
of fashion which he frequented. The little lord slept all night through,
in spite of the squeezing, and the horn-blowing, and the widow; and he
looked as fresh as paint (and, indeed; pronounced himself to be so) when
the Major, with a yellow face, a bristly beard, a wig out of curl, and
strong rheumatic griefs shooting through various limbs of his uneasy
body, descended at the little lodge-gate at Fairoaks, where the porteress
and gardener’s wife reverentially greeted him, and, still more
respectfully, Mr. Morgan, his man.
Helen was on the look-out for this expected guest, and saw him from her
window. But she did not come forward immediately to greet him. She knew
the Major did not like to be seen at a surprise, and required a little
preparation before he cared to be visible. Pen, when a boy, had incurred
sad disgrace by carrying off from the Major’s dressing-table a little
morocco box, which it must be confessed contained the Major’s back teeth,
which he naturally would leave out of his jaws in a jolting mail-coach,
and without which he would not choose to appear. Morgan, his man, made a
mystery of mystery of his wigs: curling them in private places:
introducing them mysteriously to his master’s room;--nor without his head
of hair would the Major care to show himself to any member of his family,
or any acquaintance. He went to his apartment then and supplied these
deficiencies; he groaned, and moaned, and wheezed, and cursed Morgan
through his toilet, as an old buck will, who has been up all night with a
rheumatism, and has a long duty to perform. And finally being belted,
curled, and set straight, he descended upon the drawing-room, with a
grave majestic air, such as befitted one who was at once a man of
business and a man of fashion.
Pen was not there, however; only Helen, and little Laura sewing at her
knees; and to whom he never presented more than a forefinger, as he did
on this occasion after saluting his sister-in-law. Laura took the finger
trembling and dropped it--and then fled out of the room. Major Pendennis
did not want to keep her, or indeed to have her in the house at all, and
had his private reason for disapproving of her: which we may mention on
some future occasion. Meanwhile Laura disappeared and wandered about the
premises seeking for Pen: whom she presently found in the orchard, pacingup and down a walk there in earnest conversation with Mr. Smirke. He was
so occupied that he did not hear Laura’s clear voice singing out, until
Smirke pulled him by the coat and pointed towards her as she came
running.
She ran up and put her hand into his. "Come in, Pen," she said, "there’s
somebody come; uncle Arthur’s come."
"He is, is he?" said Pen, and she felt him grasp her little hand. He
looked round at Smirke with uncommon fierceness, as much as to say, I am
ready for him or any man.--Mr. Smirke cast up his eyes as usual and
heaved a gentle sigh.
"Lead on, Laura," Pen said, with a half fierce, half comic air--"Lead on,
and say I wait upon my uncle." But he was laughing in order to hide a
great anxiety: and was screwing his courage inwardly to face the ordeal
which he knew was now before him.
Pen had taken Smirke into his confidence in the last two days, and after
the outbreak attendant on the discovery of Doctor Portman, and during
every one of those forty-eight hours which he had passed in Mr. Smirke’s
society, had done nothing but talk to his tutor about Miss Fotheringay--
Miss Emily Fotheringay--Emily, etc., to all which talk Smirke listened
without difficulty, for he was in love himself, most anxious in all
things to propitiate Pen, and indeed very much himself enraptured by the
personal charms of this goddess, whose like, never having been before at
a theatrical representation, he had not beheld until now. Pen’s fire and
volubility, his hot eloquence and rich poetical tropes and figures, his
manly heart, kind, ardent, and hopeful, refusing to see any defects in
the person he loved, any difficulties in their position that he might not
overcome, had half convinced Mr. Smirke that the arrangement proposed by
Mr. Pen was a very feasible and prudent one, and that it would be a great
comfort to have Emily settled at Fairoaks, Captain Costigan in the yellow
room, established for life there, and Pen married at eighteen.
And it is a fact that in these two days the boy had almost talked over
his mother, too; had parried all her objections one after another with
that indignant good sense which is often the perfection of absurdity; and
had brought her almost to acquiesce in the belief that if the marriage
was doomed in heaven, why doomed it was--that if the young woman was a
good person, it was all that she for her part had to ask; and rather to
dread the arrival of the guardian uncle who she foresaw would regard Mr.
Pen’s marriage in a manner very different to that simple, romantic,
honest, and utterly absurd way in which the widow was already disposed to
look at questions of this sort.
For as in the old allegory of the gold and silver shield, about which
the two knights quarrelled, each is right according to the point from
which he looks: so about marriage; the question whether it is foolish or
good, wise or otherwise, depends upon the point of view from which you
regard it. If it means a snug house in Belgravia, and pretty little
dinner-parties, and a pretty little brougham to drive in the Park, and a
decent provision not only for the young people, but for the littleBelgravians to come; and if these are the necessaries of life (and they
are with many honest people), to talk of any other arrangement is an
absurdity: of love in lodgings--a babyish folly of affection: that can’t
pay coach-hire or afford a decent milliner--as mere wicked balderdash and
childish romance. If on the other hand your opinion is that people, not
with an assured subsistence, but with a fair chance to obtain it, and
with the stimulus of hope, health, and strong affection, may take the
chance of Fortune for better or worse, and share its good or its evil
together, the polite theory then becomes an absurdity in its turn: worse
than an absurdity, a blasphemy almost, and doubt of Providence; and a man
who waits to make his chosen woman happy, until he can drive her to
church in a neat little carriage with a pair of horses, is no better than
a coward or a trifler, who is neither worthy of love nor of fortune.
I don’t say that the town folks are not right, but Helen Pendennis was a
country-bred woman, and the book of life, as she interpreted it, told her
a different story to that page which is read in cities. Like most soft
and sentimental women, matchmaking, in general, formed a great part of
her thoughts, and I daresay she had begun to speculate about her son’s
falling in love and marrying long before the subject had ever entered
into the brains of the young gentleman. It pleased her (with that dismal
pleasure which the idea of sacrificing themselves gives to certain women)
to think of the day when she would give up all to Pen, and he should
bring his wife home, and she would surrender the keys and the best
bedroom, and go and sit at the side of the table, and see him happy. What
did she want in life, but to see the lad prosper? As an empress certainly
was not too good for him, and would be honoured by becoming Mrs. Pen; so
if he selected humble Esther instead of Queen Vashti, she would be
content with his lordship’s choice. Never mind how lowly or poor the
person might be who was to enjoy that prodigious honour, Mrs. Pendennis
was willing to bow before her and welcome her, and yield her up the first
place. But an actress--a mature woman, who had long ceased blushing
except with rouge, as she stood under the eager glances of thousands of
eyes--an illiterate and ill-bred person, very likely, who must have lived
with light associates, and have heard doubtful conversation--Oh! it was
hard that such a one should be chosen, and that the matron should be
deposed to give place to such a Sultana.
All these doubts the widow laid before Pen during the two days which had
of necessity to elapse ere the uncle came down; but he met them with that
happy frankness and ease which a young gentleman exhibits at his time of
life, and routed his mother’s objections with infinite satisfaction to
himself. Miss Costigan was a paragon of virtue and delicacy; she was as
sensitive as the most timid maiden; she was as pure as the unsullied
snow; she had the finest manners, the most graceful wit and genius, the
most charming refinement and justness of appreciation in all matters of
taste; she had the most admirable temper and devotion to her father, a
good old gentleman of high family and fallen fortunes, who had lived,
however, with the best society in Europe: he was in no hurry, and could
afford to wait any time,--till he was one-and-twenty. But he felt (and
here his face assumed an awful and harrowing solemnity) that he was
engaged in the one only passion of his life, and that DEATH alone could
close it.Helen told him, with a sad smile and shake of the head, that people
survived these passions, and as for long engagements contracted between
very young men and old women--she knew an instance in her own family--
Laura’s poor father was an instance--how fatal they were.
Mr. Pen, however, was resolved that death must be his doom in case of
disappointment, and rather than this--rather than baulk him, in fact--
this lady would have submitted to any sacrifice or personal pain, and
would have gone down on her knees and have kissed the feet of a Hottentot
daughter-in-law.
Arthur knew his power over the widow, and the young tyrant was touched
whilst he exercised it. In those two days he brought her almost into
submission, and patronised her very kindly; and he passed one evening
with the lovely pie-maker at Chatteris, in which he bragged of his
influence over his mother; and he spent the other night in composing a
most flaming and conceited copy of verses to his divinity, in which he
vowed, like Montrose, that he would make her famous with his sword and
glorious by his pen, and that he would love her as no mortal woman had
been adored since the creation of womankind.
It was on that night, long after midnight, that wakeful Helen, passing
stealthily by her son’s door, saw a light streaming through the chink of
the door into the dark passage, and heard Pen tossing and tumbling, and
mumbling verses in his bed. She waited outside for a while, anxiously
listening to him. In infantile fevers and early boyish illnesses, many a
night before, the kind soul had so kept watch. She turned the lock very
softly now, and went in so gently, that Pen for a moment did not see her.
His face was turned from her. His papers on his desk were scattered
about, and more were lying on the bed round him. He was biting a pencil
and thinking of rhymes and all sorts of follies and passions. He was
Hamlet jumping into Ophelia’s grave: he was the Stranger taking Mrs.
Haller to his arms, beautiful Mrs. Haller, with the raven ringlets
falling over her shoulders. Despair and Byron, Thomas Moore and all the
Loves of the Angels, Waller and Herrick, Beranger and all the love-songs
he had ever read, were working and seething in this young gentleman’s
mind, and he was at the very height and paroxysm of the imaginative
frenzy when his mother found him.
"Arthur," said the mother’s soft silver voice: and he started up and
turned round. He clutched some of the papers and pushed them under the
pillow.
"Why don’t you go to sleep, my dear?" she said, with a sweet tender
smile, and sate down on the bed and took one of his hot hands.
Pen looked at her wildly for an instant--"I couldn’t sleep," he said--"
I--I was--I was writing."--And hereupon he flung his arms round her neck
and said, "O mother! I love her, I love her!"--How could such a kind soul
as that help soothing and pitying him? The gentle creature did her best:
and thought with a strange wonderment and tenderness that it was only
yesterday that he was a child in that bed; and how she used to come andsay her prayers over it before he woke upon holiday mornings.
They were very grand verses, no doubt, although Miss Fotheringay did not
understand them; but old Cos, with a wink and a knowing finger on his
nose, said, "Put them up with th’ other letthers, Milly darling.
Poldoody’s pomes was nothing to this." So Milly locked up the
manuscripts.
When then, the Major being dressed and presentable, presented himself to
Mrs. Pendennis, he found in the course of ten minutes’ colloquy that the
poor widow was not merely distressed at the idea of the marriage
contemplated by Pen, but actually more distressed at thinking that the
boy himself was unhappy about it, and that his uncle and he should have
any violent altercation on the subject. She besought Major Pendennis to
be very gentle with Arthur: "He has a very high spirit, and will not
brook unkind words," she hinted. "Dr. Portman spoke to him rather
roughly--and I must own unjustly, the other night--for my dearest boy’s
honour is as high as any mother can desire--but Pen’s answer quite
frightened me, it was so indignant. Recollect he is a man now; and be
very--very cautious," said the widow, laying a fair long hand on the
Major’s sleeve.
He took it up, kissed it gallantly and looked in her alarmed face with
wonder, and a scorn which he was too polite to show. "Bon Dieu!" thought
the old negotiator, "the boy has actually talked the woman round, and
she’d get him a wife as she would a toy if Master cried for it. Why are
there no such things as lettres-de-cachet--and a Bastille for young
fellows of family?" The Major lived in such good company that he might be
excused for feeling like an Earl.--He kissed the widow’s timid hand,
pressed it in both his, and laid it down on the table with one of his own
over it, as he smiled and looked her in the face.
"Confess," said he, "now, that you are thinking how you possibly can make
it up to your conscience to let the boy have his own way."
She blushed and was moved in the usual manner of females. "I am thinking
that he is very unhappy--and I am too----"
"To contradict him or to let him have his own wish?" asked the other; and
added, with great comfort to his inward self, "I’m d----d if he shall."
"To think that he should have formed so foolish and cruel and fatal an
attachment," the widow said, "which can but end in pain whatever be the
issue."
"The issue shan’t be marriage, my dear sister," the Major said
resolutely. "We’re not going to have a Pendennis, the head of the house,
marry a strolling mountebank from a booth. No, no, we won’t marry into
Greenwich Fair, ma’am."
"If the match is broken suddenly off," the widow interposed, "I don’t
know what may be the consequence. I know Arthur’s ardent temper, the
intensity of his affections, the agony of his pleasures anddisappointments, and I tremble at this one if it must be. Indeed, indeed,
it must not come on him too suddenly."
"My dear madam," the Major said, with an air of the deepest commiseration
"I’ve no doubt Arthur will have to suffer confoundedly before he gets
over the little disappointment. But is he, think you, the only person who
has been so rendered miserable?"
"No, indeed," said Helen, holding down her eyes. She was thinking of her
own case, and was at that moment seventeen again--and most miserable.
"I, myself," whispered her brother-in-law, "have undergone a
disappointment in early life. A young woman with fifteen thousand
pounds, niece to an Earl--most accomplished creature--a third of her
money would have run up my promotion in no time, and I should have been
a lieutenant--colonel at thirty: but it might not be. I was but a
penniless lieutenant: her parents interfered: and I embarked for India,
where I had the honour of being secretary to Lord Buckley, when
commander-in-Chief without her. What happened? We returned our letters,
sent back our locks of hair (the Major here passed his fingers through
his wig), we suffered--but we recovered. She is now a baronet’s wife with
thirteen grown-up children; altered, it is true, in person; but her
daughters remind me of what she was, and the third is to be presented
early next week."
Helen did not answer. She was still thinking of old times. I suppose if
one lives to be a hundred: there are certain passages of one’s early life
whereof the recollection will always carry us back to youth again, and
that Helen was thinking of one of these.
"Look at my own brother, my dear creature," the Major continued
gallantly: "he himself, you know, had a little disappointment when he
started in the--the medical profession--an eligible opportunity presented
itself. Miss Balls, I remember the name, was daughter of an apoth--a
practitioner in very large practice; my brother had very nearly succeeded
in his suit.--But difficulties arose: disappointments supervened, and--
and I am sure he had no reason to regret the disappointment, which gave
him this hand," said the Major, and he once more politely pressed Helen’s
fingers.
"Those marriages between people of such different rank and age," said
Helen, "are sad things. I have known them produce a great deal of
unhappiness.--Laura’s father, my cousin, who--who was brought up with
me"--she added, in a low voice, "was an instance of that."
"Most injudicious," cut in the Major. "I don’t know anything more painful
than for a man to marry his superior in age or his inferior in station.
Fancy marrying a woman of low rank of life, and having your house filled
with her confounded tag-rag-and-bobtail of relations! Fancy your wife
attached to a mother who dropped her h’s, or called Maria Marire! How are
you to introduce her into society? My dear Mrs. Pendennis, I will name no
names, but in the very best circles of London society I have seen men
suffering the most excruciating agony, I have known them to be cut, to belost utterly, from the vulgarity of their wives’ connections. What did
Lady Snapperton do last year at her dejeune dansant after the Bohemian
Ball? She told Lord Brouncker that he might bring his daughters or send
them with a proper chaperon, but that she would not receive Lady
Brouncker who was a druggist’s daughter, or some such thing, and as Tom
Wagg remarked of her, never wanted medicine certainly, for she never had
an h in her life. Good Ged, what would have been the trifling pang of a
separation in the first instance to the enduring infliction of a constant
misalliance and intercourse with low people?"
"What, indeed!" said Helen, dimly disposed towards laughter, but yet
checking the inclination, because she remembered in what prodigious
respect her deceased husband held Major Pendennis and his stories of the
great world.
"Then this fatal woman is ten years older than that silly young
scapegrace of an Arthur. What happens in such cases, my dear creature? I
don’t mind telling you, now we are alone that in the highest state of
society, misery, undeviating misery, is the result. Look at Lord
Clodworthy come into a room with his wife--why, good Ged, she looks like
Clodworthy’s mother. What’s the case between Lord and Lady Willowbank,
whose love match was notorious? He has already cut her down twice when
she has hanged herself out of jealousy for Mademoiselle de Sainte
Cunegonde, the dancer; and mark my words, good Ged, one day he’ll not cut
the old woman down. No, my dear madam, you are not in the world, but I
am: you are a little romantic and sentimental (you know you are--women
with those large beautiful eyes always are); you must leave this matter
to my experience. Marry this woman! Marry at eighteen an actress of
thirty--bah bah!--I would as soon he sent into the kitchen and married
the cook."
"I know the evils of premature engagements," sighed out Helen: and as she
has made this allusion no less than thrice in the course of the above
conversation, and seems to be so oppressed with the notion of long
engagements and unequal marriages, and as the circumstance we have to
relate will explain what perhaps some persons are anxious to know, namely
who little Laura is, who has appeared more than once before us, it will
be as well to clear up these points in another chapter.
CHAPTER VIII
In which Pen is kept waiting at the Door, while the Reader is informed
who little Laura was.
Once upon a time, then, there was a young gentleman of Cambridge
University who came to pass the long vacation at the village where young
Helen Thistlewood was living with her mother, the widow of the lieutenant
slain at Copenhagen. This gentleman, whose name was the Reverend Francis
Bell, was nephew to Mrs. Thistlewood, and by consequence, own cousin toMiss Helen, so that it was very right that he should take lodgings in his
aunt’s house, who lived in a very small way; and there he passed the long
vacation, reading with three or four pupils who accompanied him to the
village. Mr. Bell was fellow of a college, and famous in the University
for his learning and skill as a tutor.
His two kinswomen understood pretty early that the reverend gentleman was
engaged to be married, and was only waiting for a college living to
enable him to fulfil his engagement. His intended bride was the daughter
of another parson, who had acted as Mr. Bell’s own private tutor in
Bell’s early life, and it was whilst under Mr. Coacher’s roof, indeed,
and when only a boy of seventeen or eighteen years of age, that the
impetuous young Bell had flung himself at the feet of Miss Martha
Coacher, whom he was helping to pick peas in the garden. On his knees,
before those peas and her, he pledged himself to an endless affection.
Miss Coacher was by many years the young fellow’s senior and her own
heart had been lacerated by many previous disappointments in the
matrimonial line. No less than three pupils of her father had trifled
with those young affections. The apothecary of the village had despicably
jilted her. The dragoon officer, with whom she had danced so many many
times during that happy season which she passed at Bath with her gouty
grandmamma, one day gaily shook his bridle-rein and galloped away never
to return. Wounded by the shafts of repeated ingratitude, can it be
wondered at that the heart of Martha Coacher should pant to find rest
somewhere? She listened to the proposals of the gawky gallant honest boy,
with great kindness and good-humour; at the end of his speech she said,
"Law, Bell, I’m sure you are too young to think of such things;" but
intimated that she too would revolve them in her own virgin bosom. She
could not refer Mr. Bell to her mamma, for Mr. Coacher was a widower, and
being immersed in his books, was of course unable to take the direction
of so frail and wondrous an article as a lady’s heart, which Miss Martha
had to manage for herself.
A lock of her hair, tied up in a piece of blue ribbon, conveyed to the
happy Bell the result of the Vestal’s conference with herself. Thrice
before had she snipt off one of her auburn ringlets, and given them away.
The possessors were faithless, but the hair had grown again: and Martha
had indeed occasion to say that men were deceivers when she handed over
this token of love to the simple boy.
Number 6, however, was an exception to former passions--Francis Bell was
the most faithful of lovers. When his time arrived to go to college, and
it became necessary to acquaint Mr. Coacher of the arrangements that had
been made, the latter cried, "God bless my soul, I hadn’t the least idea
what was going on;" as was indeed very likely, for he had been taken in
three times before in precisely a similar manner; and Francis went to the
University resolved to conquer honours, so as to be able to lay them at
the feet of his beloved Martha.
This prize in view made him labour prodigiously. News came, term after
term, of the honours he won. He sent the prize-books for his college
essays to old Coacher, and his silver declamation cup to Miss Martha. Indue season he was high among the Wranglers, and a fellow of his college;
and during all the time of these transactions a constant tender
correspondence was kept up with Miss Coacher, to whose influence, and
perhaps with justice, he attributed the successes which he had won.
By the time, however, when the Rev. Francis Bell, M.A., and Fellow and
Tutor of his College, was twenty-six years of age, it happened that Miss
Coacher was thirty-four, nor had her charms, her manners, or her temper
improved since that sunny day in the springtime of life when he found her
picking peas in the garden. Having achieved his honours he relaxed in the
ardour of his studies, and his judgment and tastes also perhaps became
cooler. The sunshine of the pea-garden faded away from Miss Martha, and
poor Bell found himself engaged--and his hand pledged to that bond in a
thousand letters--to a coarse, ill-tempered, ill-favoured, ill-mannered,
middle-aged woman.
It was in consequence of one of many altercations (in which Martha’s
eloquence shone, and in which therefore she was frequently pleased to
indulge) that Francis refused to take his pupils to Bearleader’s Green,
where Mr. Coacher’s living was, and where Bell was in the habit of
spending the summer: and he bethought him that he would pass the vacation
at his aunt’s village, which he had not seen for many years--not since
little Helen was a girl and used to sit on his knee. Down then he came
and lived with them. Helen was grown a beautiful young woman now. The
cousins were nearly four months together, from June to October. They
walked in the summer evenings: they met in the early morn. They read out
of the same book when the old lady dozed at night over the candles. What
little Helen knew, Frank taught her. She sang to him: she gave her
artless heart to him. She was aware of all his story. Had he made any
secret?--had he not shown the picture of the woman to whom he was
engaged, and with a blush,--her letters, hard, eager, and cruel?--The
days went on and on, happier and closer, with more kindness, more
confidence, and more pity. At last one morning in October came, when
Francis went back to college, and the poor girl felt that her tender
heart was gone with him.
Frank too wakened up from the delightful midsummer dream to the horrible
reality of his own pain. He gnashed and tore at the chain which bound
him. He was frantic to break it and be free. Should he confess?--give his
savings to the woman to whom he was bound, and beg his release?--there
was time yet--he temporised. No living might fall in for years to come.
The cousins went on corresponding sadly and fondly: the betrothed woman,
hard, jealous, and dissatisfied, complaining bitterly, and with reason,
of her Francis’s altered tone.
At last things came to a crisis, and the new attachment was discovered.
Francis owned it, cared not to disguise it, rebuked Martha with her
violent temper and angry imperiousness, and, worst of all, with her
inferiority and her age.
Her reply was, that if he did not keep his promise she would carry his
letters into every court in the kingdom--letters in which his love was
pledged to her ten thousand times; and, after exposing him to the worldas the perjurer and traitor he was, she would kill herself.
Frank had one more interview with Helen, whose mother was dead then, and
who was living companion with old Lady Pontypool,--one more interview,
where it was resolved that he was to do his duty; that is, to redeem his
vow; that is, to pay a debt cozened from him by a sharper; that is, to
make two honest people miserable. So the two judged their duty to be, and
they parted.
The living fell in only too soon; but yet Frank Bell was quite a grey and
worn-out man when he was inducted into it. Helen wrote him a letter on
his marriage, beginning "My dear Cousin," and ending "always truly
yours." She sent him back the other letters, and the lock of his hair--
all but a small piece. She had it in her desk when she was talking to the
Major.
Bell lived for three or four years in his living, at the end of which
time, the Chaplainship of Coventry Island falling vacant, Frank applied
for it privately, and having procured it, announced the appointment to
his wife. She objected, as she did to everything. He told her bitterly
that he did not want her to come: so she went. Bell went out in Governor
Crawley’s time, and was very intimate with that gentleman in his later
years. And it was in Coventry Island, years after his own marriage, and
five years after he had heard of the birth of Helen’s boy, that his own
daughter was born.
She was not the daughter of the first Mrs. Bell, who died of island fever
very soon after Helen Pendennis and her husband, to whom Helen had told
everything, wrote to inform Bell of the birth of their child. "I was old,
was I?" said Mrs. Bell the first; "I was old, and her inferior, was I?
but I married you, Mr. Bell, and kept you from marrying her?" and
hereupon she died. Bell married a colonial lady, whom be loved fondly.
But he was not doomed to prosper in love; and, this lady dying in
childbirth, Bell gave up too: sending his little girl home to Helen
Pendennis and her husband, with a parting prayer that they would befriend
her.
The little thing came to Fairoaks from Bristol, which is not very far
off, dressed in black, and in company of a soldier’s wife, her nurse, at
parting from whom she wept bitterly. But she soon dried up her grief
under Helen’s motherly care.
Round her neck she had a locket with hair, which Helen had given, ah how
many years ago! to poor Francis, dead and buried. This child was all that
was left of him, and she cherished, as so tender a creature would, the
legacy which he had bequeathed to her. The girl’s name, as his dying
letter stated, was Helen Laura. But John Pendennis, though he accepted
the trust, was always rather jealous of the orphan; and gloomily ordered
that she should be called by her own mother’s name; and not by that first
one which her father had given her. She was afraid of Mr. Pendennis, to
the last moment of his life. And it was only when her husband was gone
that Helen dared openly to indulge in the tenderness which she felt for
the little girl.Thus it was that Laura Bell became Mrs. Pendennis’s daughter. Neither her
husband nor that gentleman’s brother, the Major, viewed her with very
favourable eyes. She reminded the first of circumstances in his wife’s
life which he was forced to accept, but would have forgotten much more
willingly and as for the second, how could he regard her? She was
neither related to his own family of Pendennis, nor to any nobleman in
this empire, and she had but a couple of thousand pounds for her fortune.
And now let Mr. Pen come in, who has been waiting all this while.
Having strung up his nerves, and prepared himself, without at the door,
for the meeting, he came to it, determined to face the awful uncle. He
had settled in his mind that the encounter was to be a fierce one, and
was resolved on bearing it through with all the courage and dignity of
the famous family which he represented. And he flung open the door and
entered with the most severe and warlike expression, armed cap-a-pie as
it were, with lance couched and plumes displayed, and glancing at his
adversary, as if to say, "Come on, I’m ready."
The old man of the world, as he surveyed the boy’s demeanour, could
hardly help a grin at his admirable pompous simplicity. Major Pendennis
too had examined his ground; and finding that the widow was already half
won over to the enemy, and having a shrewd notion that threats and tragic
exhortations would have no effect upon the boy, who was inclined to be
perfectly stubborn and awfully serious, the Major laid aside the
authoritative manner at once, and with the most good-humoured natural
smile in the world, held out his hands to Pen, shook the lad’s passive
fingers gaily, and said, "Well, Pen, my boy, tell us all about it."
Helen was delighted with the generosity of the Major’s good-humour. On
the contrary, it quite took aback and disappointed poor Pen, whose nerves
were strung up for a tragedy, and who felt that his grand entree was
altogether baulked and ludicrous. He blushed and winced with mortified
vanity and bewilderment. He felt immensely inclined to begin to cry--"I--
I--I didn’t know that you were come till just now," he said: "is--is--
town very full, I suppose?"
If Pen could hardly gulp his tears down, it was all the Major could do to
keep from laughter. He turned round and shot a comical glance at Mrs.
Pendennis, who too felt that the scene was at once ridiculous and
sentimental. And so, having nothing to say, she went up and kissed Mr.
Pen: as he thought of her tenderness and soft obedience to his wishes, it
is very possible too the boy was melted.
"What a couple of fools they are," thought the old guardian. "If I hadn’t
come down, she would have driven over in state to pay a visit and give
her blessing to the young lady’s family."
"Come, come," said he, still grinning at the couple, "let us have as
little sentiment as possible, and, Pen, my good fellow, tell us the whole
story."Pen got back at once to his tragic and heroical air. "The story is, sir,"
said he, "as I have written it to you before. I have made the
acquaintance of a most beautiful and most virtuous lady; of a high
family, although in reduced circumstances: I have found the woman in whom
I know that the happiness of my life is centred; I feel that I never,
never can think about any woman but her. I am aware of the difference of
our ages and other difficulties in my way. But my affection was so great
that I felt I could surmount all these; that we both could: and she has
consented to unite her lot with mine, and to accept my heart and my
fortune."
"How much is that, my boy?" said the Major. "Has anybody left you some
money? I don’t know that you are worth a shilling in the world."
"You know what I have is his," cried out Mrs. Pendennis.
"Good heavens, madam, hold your tongue!" was what the guardian was
disposed to say; but he kept his temper, not without a struggle. "No
doubt, no doubt," he said. "You would sacrifice anything for him.
Everybody knows that. But it is, after all then, your fortune which Pen
is offering to the young lady; and of which he wishes to take possession
at eighteen."
"I know my mother will give me anything," Pen said, looking rather
disturbed.
"Yes, my good fellow, but there is reason in all things. If your mother
keeps the house, it is but fair that she should select her company. When
you give her house over her head, and transfer her banker’s account to
yourself for the benefit of Miss What-d’-you-call-’em--Miss Costigan--
don’t you think you should at least have consulted my sister as one of
the principal parties in the transaction? I am speaking to you, you see,
without the least anger or assumption of authority, such as the law and
your father’s will give me over you for three years to come--but as one
man of the world to another,--and I ask you, if you think that, because
you can do what you like with your mother, therefore you have a right to
do so? As you are her dependent, would it not have been more generous to
wait before you took this step, and at least to have paid her the
courtesy to ask her leave?"
Pen held down his head, and began dimly to perceive that the action on
which he had prided himself as a most romantic, generous instance of
disinterested affection, was perhaps a very selfish and headstrong piece
of folly.
"I did it in a moment of passion," said Pen, floundering; "I was not
aware what I was going to say or to do" (and in this he spoke with
perfect sincerity) "But now it is said, and I stand to it. No; I neither
can nor will recall it. I’ll die rather than do so. And I--I don’t want
to burthen my mother," he continued. "I’ll work for myself. I’ll go on
the stage, and act with her. She--she says I should do well there."
"But will she take you on those terms?" the Major interposed. "Mind, I donot say that Miss Costigan is not the most disinterested of women: but,
don’t you suppose now, fairly, that your position as a young gentleman of
ancient birth and decent expectations forms a part of the cause why she
finds your addresses welcome?"
"I’ll die, I say, rather than forfeit my pledge to her," said Pen,
doubling his fists and turning red.
"Who asks you, my dear friend?" answered the imperturbable guardian. "No
gentleman breaks his word, of course, when it has been given freely. But
after all, you can wait. You owe something to your mother, something to
your family--something to me as your father’s representative."
"Oh, of course," Pen said, feeling rather relieved.
"Well, as you have pledged your word to her, give us another, will you
Arthur?"
"What is it?" Arthur asked.
"That you will make no private marriage--that you won’t be taking a trip
to Scotland, you understand."
"That would be a falsehood. Pen never told his mother a falsehood," Helen
said.
Pen hung down his head again, and his eyes filled with tears of shame.
Had not this whole intrigue been a falsehood to that tender and confiding
creature who was ready to give up all for his sake? He gave his uncle his
hand.
"No, sir--on my word of honour, as a gentleman," he said, "I will never
marry without my mother’s consent!" and giving Helen a bright parting
look of confidence and affection unchangeable, the boy went out of the
drawing-room into his own study.
"He’s an angel--he’s an angel," the mother cried out in one of her usual
raptures.
"He comes of a good stock, ma’am," said her brother-in-law--"of a good
stock on both sides." The Major was greatly pleased with the result of
his diplomacy--so much so, that he once more saluted the tips of Mrs.
Pendennis’s glove, and dropping the curt, manly, and straightforward tone
in which he had conducted the conversation with the lad, assumed a
certain drawl which he always adopted when he was most conceited and
fine.
"My dear creature," said he, in that his politest tone, "I think it
certainly as well that I came down, and I flatter myself that last botte
was a successful one. I tell you how I came to think of it. Three years
ago my kind friend Lady Ferrybridge sent for me in the greatest state of
alarm about her son Gretna, whose affair you remember, and implored me to
use my influence with the young gentleman, who was engaged in an affairede coeur with a Scotch clergyman’s daughter, Miss MacToddy. I implored, I
entreated gentle measures. But Lord Ferrybridge was furious, and tried
the high hand. Gretna was sulky and silent, and his parents thought they
had conquered. But what was the fact, my dear creature? The young people
had been married for three months before Lord Ferrybridge knew anything
about it. And that was why I extracted the promise from Master Pen."
"Arthur would never have done so," Mrs. Pendennis said.
"He hasn’t,--that is one comfort," answered the brother-in-law.
Like a wary and patient man of the world, Major Pendennis did not press
poor Pen any farther for the moment, but hoped the best from time, and
that the young fellow’s eyes would be opened before long to see the
absurdity of which he was guilty. And having found out how keen the boy’s
point of honour was, he worked kindly upon that kindly feeling with great
skill, discoursing him over their wine after dinner, and pointing out to
Pen the necessity of a perfect uprightness and openness in all his
dealings, and entreating that his communications with his interesting
young friend (as the Major politely called Miss Fotheringay) should be
carried on with the knowledge, if not approbation, of Mrs. Pendennis.
"After all, Pen," the Major said, with a convenient frankness that did
not displease the boy, whilst it advanced the interests of the
negotiator, "you must bear in mind that you are throwing yourself away.
Your mother may submit to your marriage as she would to anything else you
desired, if you did but cry long enough for it: but be sure of this, that
it can never please her. You take a young woman off the boards of a
country theatre and prefer her, for such is the case, to one of the
finest ladies in England. And your mother will submit to your choice, but
you can’t suppose that she will be happy under it. I have often fancied,
entre nous, that my sister had it in her eye to make a marriage between
you and that little ward of hers--Flora, Laura--what’s her name? And I
always determined to do my small endeavour to prevent any such match. The
child has but two thousand pounds, I am given to understand. It is only
with the utmost economy and care that my sister can provide for the
decent maintenance of her house, and for your appearance and education as
a gentleman; and I don’t care to own to you that I had other and much
higher views for you. With your name and birth, sir--with your talents,
which I suppose are respectable, with the friends whom I have the honour
to possess, I could have placed you in an excellent position--a
remarkable position for a young man of such exceeding small means, and
had hoped to see you, at least, try to restore the honours of our name.
Your mother’s softness stopped one prospect, or you might have been a
general, like our gallant ancestor who fought at Ramillies and
Malplaquet. I had another plan in view: my excellent and kind friend,
Lord Bagwig, who is very well disposed towards me, would, I have little
doubt, have attached you to his mission at Pumpernickel, and you might
have advanced in the diplomatic service. But, pardon me for recurring to
the subject; how is a man to serve a young gentleman of eighteen, who
proposes to marry a lady of thirty, whom he has selected from a booth in
a fair?--well, not a fair,--a barn. That profession at once is closed to
you. The public service is closed to you. Society is closed to you. You
see, my good friend, to what you bring yourself. You may get on at thebar to be sure, where I am given to understand that gentlemen of merit
occasionally marry out of their kitchens; but in no other profession. Or
you may come and live down here--down here, mon Dieu! for ever" (said the
Major, with a dreary shrug, as he thought with inexpressible fondness of
Pall Mall), "where your mother will receive the Mrs. Arthur that is to
be, with perfect kindness; where the good people of the county won’t
visit you; and where, by Gad, sir, I shall be shy of visiting you myself,
for I’m a plain-spoken man, and I own to you that I like to live with
gentlemen for my companions; where you will have to live, with
rum-and-water--drinking gentlemen--farmers, and drag through your life
the young husband of an old woman, who, if she doesn’t quarrel with your
mother, will at least cost that lady her position in society, and drag
her down into that dubious caste into which you must inevitably fall. It
is no affair of mine, my good sir. I am not angry. Your downfall will not
hurt me farther than that it will extinguish the hopes I had of seeing my
family once more taking its place in the world. It is only your mother
and yourself that will be ruined. And I pity you both from my soul. Pass
the claret: it is some I sent to your poor father; I remember I bought it
at poor Lord Levant’s sale. But of course," added the Major, smacking the
wine, "having engaged yourself, you will do what becomes you as a man of
honour, however fatal your promise may be. However, promise us on our
side, my boy, what I set out by entreating you to grant,--that there
shall be nothing clandestine, that you will pursue your studies, that you
will only visit your interesting friend at proper intervals. Do you
write to her much?"
Pen blushed and said, "Why, yes, he had written."
"I suppose verses, eh! as well as prose? I was a dab at verses myself. I
recollect when I first joined, I used to write verses for the fellows in
the regiment; and did some pretty things in that way. I was talking to my
old friend General Hobbler about some lines I dashed off for him in the
year 1806, when we were at the Cape, and, Gad, he remembered every line
of them still; for he’d used ’em so often, the old rogue, and had
actually tried ’em on Mrs. Hobbler, sir--who brought him sixty thousand
pounds. I suppose you’ve tried verses, eh, Pen?"
Pen blushed again, and said, "Why, yes, he had written verses."
"And does the fair one respond in poetry or prose?" asked the Major,
eyeing his nephew with the queerest expression, as much as to say, "O
Moses and Green Spectacles! what a fool the boy is."
Pen blushed again. She had written, but not in verse, the young lover
owned, and he gave his breast-pocket the benefit of a squeeze with his
left arm, which the Major remarked, according to his wont.
"You have got the letters there, I see," said the old campaigner, nodding
at Pen and pointing to his own chest (which was manfully wadded with
cotton by Mr. Stultz). "You know you have. I would give twopence to see
’em."
"Why," said Pen, twiddling the stalks of the strawberries, "I--I," butthis sentence never finished; for Pen’s face was so comical and
embarrassed, as the Major watched it, that the elder could contain his
gravity no longer, and burst into a fit of laughter, in which chorus Pen
himself was obliged to join after a minute: when he broke out fairly into
a guffaw.
It sent them with great good-humour into Mrs. Pendennis’s drawing-room.
She was pleased to hear them laughing in the hall as they crossed it.
"You sly rascal!" said the Major, putting his arm gaily on Pen’s
shoulder, and giving a playful push at the boy’s breast-pocket. He felt
the papers crackling there sure enough. The young fellow was delighted--
conceited--triumphant--and in one word, a spoony.
The pair came to the tea-table in the highest spirits. The Major’s
politeness was beyond expression. He had never tasted such good tea, and
such bread was only to be had in the country. He asked Mrs. Pendennis for
one of her charming songs. He then made Pen sing, and was delighted and
astonished at the beauty of the boy’s voice: he made his nephew fetch his
maps and drawings, and praised them as really remarkable works of talent
in a young fellow: he complimented him on his French pronunciation: he
flattered the simple boy as adroitly as ever lover flattered a mistress:
and when bedtime came, mother and son went to their several rooms
perfectly enchanted with the kind Major.
When they had reached those apartments, I suppose Helen took to her knees
as usual: and Pen read over his letters before going to bed: just as if
he didn’t know every word of them by heart already. In truth there were
but three of those documents and to learn their contents required no
great effort of memory.
In No. 1, Miss Fotheringay presents grateful compliments to Mr.
Pendennis, and in her papa’s name and her own begs to thank him for his
most beautiful presents. They will always be kept carefully; and Miss F.
and Captain C. will never forget the delightful evening which they passed
on Tuesday last.
No. 2 said--Dear Sir, we shall have a small quiet party of social friends
at our humble board, next Tuesday evening, at an early tea, when I shall
wear the beautiful scarf which, with its accompanying delightful verses,
I shall ever, ever cherish: and papa bids me say how happy he will be if
you will join ’the feast of reason and the flow of soul’ in our festive
little party, as I am sure will be your truly grateful Emily Fotheringay.
No. 3 was somewhat more confidential, and showed that matters had
proceeded rather far. You were odious yesterday night, the letter said.
Why did you not come to the stage-door? Papa could not escort me on
account of his eye; he had an accident, and fell down over a loose carpet
on the stair on Sunday night. I saw you looking at Miss Diggle all night;
and you were so enchanted with Lydia Languish you scarcely once looked
at Julia. I could have crushed Bingley, I was so angry. I play Ella
Rosenberg on Friday: will you come then? Miss Diggle performs--ever
your E. F.These three letters Mr. Pen used to read at intervals, during the day and
night, and embrace with that delight and fervour which such beautiful
compositions surely warranted. A thousand times at least he had kissed
fondly the musky satin paper, made sacred to him by the hand of Emily
Fotheringay. This was all he had in return for his passion and flames,
his vows and protests, his rhymes and similes, his wakeful nights and
endless thoughts, his fondness, fears and folly. The young wiseacre had
pledged away his all for this: signed his name to endless promissory
notes, conferring his heart upon the bearer: bound himself for life, and
got back twopence as an equivalent. For Miss Costigan was a young lady of
such perfect good-conduct and self-command, that she never would have
thought of giving more, and reserved the treasures of her affection until
she could transfer them lawfully at church.
Howbeit, Mr. Pen was content with what tokens of regard he had got, and
mumbled over his three letters in a rapture of high spirits, and went to
sleep delighted with his kind old uncle from London, who must evidently
yield to his wishes in time; and, in a word, in a preposterous state of
contentment with himself and all the world.
CHAPTER IX
In which the Major opens the Campaign
Let those who have a real and heartfelt relish for London society and the
privilege of an entree into its most select circles, admit that Major
Pendennis was a man of no ordinary generosity and affection, in the
sacrifice which he now made. He gave up London in May,--his newspapers
and his mornings--his afternoons from club to club, his little
confidential visits to my Ladies, his rides in Rotten Row, his dinners,
and his stall at the Opera, his rapid escapades to Fulham or Richmond on
Saturdays and Sundays, his bow from my Lord Duke or my Lord Marquis at
the great London entertainments, and his name in the Morning Post of the
succeeding day,--his quieter little festivals, more select, secret, and
delightful--all these he resigned to lock himself into a lone little
country house, with a simple widow and a greenhorn of a son, a mawkish
curate, and a little girl of ten years of age.
He made the sacrifice, and it was the greater that few knew the extent of
it. His letters came down franked from town, and he showed the
invitations to Helen with a sigh. It was beautiful and tragical to see
him refuse one party after another--at least to those who could
understand, as Helen didn’t, the melancholy grandeur of his self-denial.
Helen did not, or only smiled at the awful pathos with which the Major
spoke of the Court Guide in general: but young Pen looked with great
respect at the great names upon the superscriptions of his uncle’s
letters, and listened to the Major’s stories about the fashionable world
with constant interest and sympathy.The elder Pendennis’s rich memory was stored with thousands of these
delightful tales, and he poured them into Pen’s willing ear with
unfailing eloquence. He knew the name and pedigree of everybody in the
Peerage, and everybody’s relations. "My dear boy," he would say, with a
mournful earnestness and veracity, "you cannot begin your genealogical
studies too early; I wish to Heavens you would read in Debrett every day.
Not so much the historical part (for the pedigrees, between ourselves,
are many of them very fabulous, and there are few families that can show
such a clear descent as our own) as the account of family alliances, and
who is related to whom. I have known a man’s career in life blasted by
ignorance on this important, this all-important subject. Why, only last
month, at dinner at my Lord Hobanob’s, a young man, who has lately been
received among us, young Mr. Suckling (author of a work, I believe),
began to speak lightly of Admiral Bowser’s conduct for ratting to
Ministers, in what I must own is the most audacious manner. But who do
you think sate next and opposite to this Mr. Suckling? Why--why, next to
him was Lady Grampound Bowser’s daughter, and opposite to him was Lord
Grampound Bowser’s son-in-law. The infatuated young man went on cutting
his jokes at the Admiral’s expense, fancying that all the world was
laughing with him, and I leave you to imagine Lady Hobanob’s feelings--
Hobanob’s!--those of every well-bred man, as the wretched intru was so
exposing himself. He will never dine again in South Street. I promise you
that."
With such discourses the Major entertained his nephew, as he paced the
terrace in front of the house for his two hours’ constitutional walk, or
as they sate together after dinner over their wine. He grieved that Sir
Francis Clavering had not come down to the park, to live in it since his
marriage, and to make a society for the neighbourhood. He mourned that
Lord Eyrie was not in the country, that he might take Pen and present him
to his lordship. "He has daughters," the Major said. "Who knows? you
might have married Lady Emily or Lady Barbara Trehawk; but all those
dreams are over; my poor fellow, you must lie on the bed which you have
made for yourself."
These things to hear did young Pendennis seriously incline. They are not
so interesting in print as when delivered orally; but the Major’s
anecdotes of the great George, of the Royal Dukes, of the statesmen,
beauties, and fashionable ladies of the day, filled young Pen’s soul with
longing and wonder; and he found the conversations with his guardian,
which sadly bored and perplexed poor Mrs. Pendennis, for his own part
never tedious.
It can’t be said that Mr. Pen’s new guide, philosopher, and friend
discoursed him on the most elevated subjects, or treated the subjects
which he chose in the most elevated manner. But his morality, such as it
was, was consistent. It might not, perhaps, tend to a man’s progress in
another world, but it was pretty well calculated to advance his interests
in this; and then it must be remembered that the Major never for one
instant doubted that his views were the only views practicable, and that
his conduct was perfectly virtuous and respectable. He was a man of
honour, in a word: and had his eyes, what he called, open. He took pityon this young greenhorn of a nephew, and wanted to open his eyes too.
No man, for instance, went more regularly to church when in the country
than the old bachelor. "It don’t matter so much in town, Pen," he said,
"for there the women go and the men are not missed. But when a gentleman
is sur ses terres, he must give an example to the country people: and if
I could turn a tune, I even think I should sing. The Duke of Saint
David’s, whom I have the honour of knowing, always sings in the country,
and let me tell you, it has a doosed fine effect from the family pew. And
you are somebody down here. As long as the Claverings are away you are
the first man in the parish: and as good as any. You might represent the
town if you played your cards well. Your poor dear father would have done
so had he lived; so might you.--Not if you marry a lady, however amiable,
whom the country people won’t meet.--Well, well: it’s a painful subject.
Let us change it, my boy." But if Major Pendennis changed the subject
once he recurred to it a score of times in the day: and the moral of his
discourse always was, that Pen was throwing himself away. Now it does not
require much coaxing or wheedling to make a simple boy believe that he is
a very fine fellow.
Pen took his uncle’s counsels to heart. He was glad enough, we have said,
to listen to his elder’s talk. The conversation of Captain Costigan
became by no means pleasant to him, and the idea of that tipsy old
father-in-law haunted him with terror. He couldn’t bring that man,
unshaven and reeking of punch, to associate with his mother. Even about
Emily--he faltered when the pitiless guardian began to question him. "Was
she accomplished?" He was obliged to own, no. "Was she clever?" Well, she
had a very good average intellect: but he could not absolutely say she
was clever. "Come, let us see some of her letters." So Pen confessed that
he had but those three of which we have made mention--and that they were
but trivial invitations or answers.
"She is cautious enough," the Major said, drily. "She is older than you,
my poor boy;" and then he apologised with the utmost frankness and
humility, and flung himself upon Pen’s good feelings, begging the lad to
excuse a fond old uncle, who had only his family’s honour in view--for
Arthur was ready to flame up in indignation whenever Miss Costigan’s
honesty was doubted, and swore that he would never have her name
mentioned lightly, and never, never would part from her.
He repeated this to his uncle and his friends at home, and also, it must
be confessed, to Miss Fotheringay and the amiable family, at Chatteris,
with whom he still continued to spend some portion of his time. Miss
Emily was alarmed when she heard of the arrival of Pen’s guardian, and
rightly conceived that the Major came down with hostile intentions to
herself. "I suppose ye intend to leave me, now your grand relation has
come down from town. He’ll carry ye off, and you’ll forget your poor
Emily, Mr. Arthur!"
Forget her! In her presence, in that of Miss Rouncy, the Columbine and
Milly’s confidential friend of the Company, in the presence of the
Captain himself, Pen swore he never could think of any other woman but
his beloved Miss Fotheringay; and the Captain, looking up at his foilswhich were hung as a trophy on the wall of the room where Pen and he used
to fence, grimly said, he would not advoise any man to meddle rashly with
the affections of his darling child; and would never believe his gallant
young Arthur, whom he treated as his son, whom he called his son, would
ever be guilty of conduct so revolting to every idaya of honour and
humanity.
He went up and embraced Pen after speaking. He cried, and wiped his eye
with one large dirty hand as he clasped Pen with the other. Arthur
shuddered in that grasp, and thought of his uncle at home. His
father-in-law looked unusually dirty and shabby; the odour of
whisky-and-water was even more decided than in common. How was he to
bring that man and his mother together? He trembled when he thought that
he had absolutely written to Costigan (enclosing to him a sovereign, the
loan of which the worthy gentleman had need), and saying that one day he
hoped to sign himself his affectionate son, Arthur Pendennis. He was glad
to get away from Chatteris that day; from Miss Rouncy the confidante;
from the old toping father-in-law; from the divine Emily herself. "O,
Emily, Emily," he cried inwardly, as he rattled homewards on Rebecca,
"you little know what sacrifices I am making for you!--for you who are
always so cold, so cautious, so mistrustful;" and he thought of a
character in Pope to whom he had often involuntarily compared her.
Pen never rode over to Chatteris upon a certain errand, but the Major
found out on what errand the boy had been. Faithful to his plan, Major
Pendennis gave his nephew no let or hindrance; but somehow the constant
feeling that the senior’s eye was upon him, an uneasy shame attendant
upon that inevitable confession which the evening’s conversation would be
sure to elicit in the most natural simple manner, made Pen go less
frequently to sigh away his soul at the feet of his charmer than he had
been wont to do previous to his uncle’s arrival. There was no use trying
to deceive him; there was no pretext of dining with Smirke, or reading
Greek plays with Foker; Pen felt, when he returned from one of his flying
visits, that everybody knew whence he came, and appeared quite guilty
before his mother and guardian, over their books or their game at
picquet.
Once having walked out half a mile, to the Fairoaks Inn, beyond the Lodge
gates, to be in readiness for the Competitor coach, which changed horses
there, to take a run for Chatteris, a man on the roof touched his hat to
the young gentleman: it was his uncle’s man, Mr. Morgan, who was going on
a message for his master, and had been took up at the Lodge, as he said.
And Mr. Morgan came back by the Rival, too; so that Pen had the pleasure
of that domestic’s company both ways. Nothing was said at home. The lad
seemed to have every decent liberty; and yet he felt himself dimly
watched and guarded, and that there were eyes upon him even in the
presence of his Dulcinea.
In fact, Pen’s suspicions were not unfounded, and his guardian had sent
forth to gather all possible information regarding the lad and his
interesting young friend. The discreet and ingenious Mr. Morgan, a London
confidential valet, whose fidelity could be trusted, had been to
Chatteris more than once, and made every inquiry regarding the pasthistory and present habits of the Captain and his daughter. He delicately
cross-examined the waiters, the ostlers, and all the inmates of the bar
at the George, and got from them what little they knew respecting the
worthy Captain. He was not held in very great regard there, as it
appeared. The waiters never saw the colour of his money, and were warned
not to furnish the poor gentleman with any liquor for which some other
party was not responsible. He swaggered sadly about the coffee-room
there, consumed a toothpick, and looked over the paper, and if any friend
asked him to dinner he stayed. Morgan heard at the George of Pen’s
acquaintance with Mr. Foker, and he went over to Baymouth to enter into
relations with that gentleman’s man; but the young student was gone to a
Coast Regatta, and his servant, of course, travelled in charge of the
dressing-case.
From the servants of the officers at the barracks Mr. Morgan found that
the Captain had so frequently and outrageously inebriated himself there,
that Colonel Swallowtail had forbidden him the messroom. The
indefatigable Morgan then put himself in communication with some of the
inferior actors at the theatre, and pumped them over their cigars and
punch, and all agreed that Costigan was poor, shabby, and given to debt
and to drink. But there was not a breath upon the reputation of Miss
Fotheringay: her father’s courage was reported to have displayed itself
on more than one occasion towards persons disposed to treat his daughter
with freedom. She never came to the theatre but with her father: in his
most inebriated moments, that gentleman kept a watch over her; finally
Mr. Morgan, from his own experience added that he had been to see her
act, and was uncommon delighted with the performance, besides thinking
her a most splendid woman.
Mrs. Creed, the pew-opener, confirmed these statements to Doctor Portman,
who examined her personally, and threatened her with the terrors of the
Church one day after afternoon service. Mrs. Creed had nothing
unfavourable to her lodger to divulge. She saw nobody; only one or two
ladies of the theatre. The Captain did intoxicate himself sometimes, and
did not always pay his rent regularly, but he did when he had money, or
rather Miss Fotheringay did. Since the young gentleman from Clavering had
been and took lessons in fencing, one or two more had come from the
barracks; Sir Derby Oaks, and his young friend, Mr. Foker, which was
often together; and which was always driving over from Baymouth in the
tandem. But on the occasions of the lessons, Miss F. was very seldom
present, and generally came downstairs to Mrs. Creed’s own room.
The Doctor and the Major consulting together as they often did, groaned
in spirit over that information. Major Pendennis openly expressed his
disappointment; and, I believe, the Divine himself was ill pleased at not
being able to jack a hole in poor Miss Fotheringay’s reputation.
Even about Pen himself, Mrs. Creed’s reports were desperately favourable.
"Whenever he come," Mrs. Creed said, "She always have me or one of the
children with her. And Mrs. Creed, marm, says she, if you please, marm,
you’ll on no account leave the room when that young gentleman’s here. And
many’s the time I’ve seen him a lookin’ as if he wished I was away, poor
young man: and he took to coming in service-time, when I wasn’t at home,of course: but she always had one of the boys up if her Pa wasn’t at
home, or old Mr. Bowser with her a teaching of her her lesson, or one of
the young ladies of the theayter."
It was all true: whatever encouragements might have been given him before
he avowed his passion, the prudence of Miss Emily was prodigious after
Pen had declared himself: and the poor fellow chafed against her hopeless
reserve, which maintained his ardour as it excited his anger.
The Major surveyed the state of things with a sigh. "If it were but a
temporary liaison," the excellent man said, "one could bear it. A young
fellow must sow his wild oats, and that sort of thing. But a virtuous
attachment is the deuce. It comes of the d----d romantic notions boys get
from being brought up by women."
"Allow me to say, Major, that you speak a little too like a man of the
world," replied the Doctor. "Nothing can be more desirable for Pen than a
virtuous attachment for a young lady of his own rank and with a
corresponding fortune--this present infatuation, of course, I must
deplore as sincerely as you do. If I were his guardian I should command
him to give it up."
"The very means, I tell you, to make him marry to-morrow. We have got
time from him, that is all, and we must do our best with that.
"I say, Major," said the Doctor, at the end of the conversation in which
the above subject was discussed--"I am not, of course, a play-going man--
but suppose, I say, we go and see her."
The Major laughed--he had been a fortnight at Fairoaks, and strange to
say, had not thought of that. "Well," he said, "why not? After all, it is
not my niece, but Miss Fotheringay the actress, and we have as good a
right as any other of the public to see her if we pay our money." So upon
a day when it was arranged that Pen was to dine at home, and pass the
evening with his mother, the two elderly gentlemen drove over to
Chatteris in the Doctor’s chaise, and there, like a couple of jolly
bachelors, dined at the George Inn, before proceeding to the play.
Only two other guests were in the room,--an officer of the regiment
quartered at Chatteris, and a young gentleman whom the Doctor thought he
had somewhere seen. They left them at their meal, however, and hastened
to the theatre. It was Hamlet over again. Shakspeare was Article XL. of
stout old Doctor Portman’s creed, to which he always made a point of
testifying publicly at least once in a year.
We have described the play before, and how those who saw Miss Fotheringay
perform in Ophelia saw precisely the same thing on one night as on
another. Both the elderly gentlemen looked at her with extraordinary
interest, thinking how very much young Pen was charmed with her.
"Gad," said the Major, between his teeth, as he surveyed her when she was
called forward as usual, and swept her curtsies to the scanty audience,
"the young rascal has not made a bad choice."The Doctor applauded her loudly and loyally. "Upon my word," said he,
"She is a very clever actress; and I must say, Major, she is endowed with
very considerable personal attractions."
"So that young officer thinks in the stage-box," Major Pendennis
answered, and he pointed out to Doctor Portman’s attention the young
dragoon of the George Coffee-room, who sate in the box in question, and
applauded with immense enthusiasm. She looked extremely sweet upon him
too, thought the Major: but that’s their way--and he shut up his natty
opera-glass and pocketed it, as if he wished to see no more that night.
Nor did the Doctor, of course, propose to stay for the after-piece, so
they rose and left the theatre; the Doctor returning to Mrs. Portman, who
was on a visit at the Deanery, and the Major walking home full of thought
towards the George, where he had bespoken a bed.
CHAPTER X
Facing the Enemy
Sauntering slowly homewards, Major Pendennis reached the George
presently, and found Mr. Morgan, his faithful valet, awaiting him at the
door of the George Inn, who stopped his master as he was about to take a
candle to go to bed, and said, with his usual air of knowing deference,
"I think, sir, if you would go into the coffee-room, there’s a young
gentleman there as you would like to see."
"What, is Mr. Arthur here?" the Major said, in great anger.
"No, sir--but his great friend, Mr. Foker, sir. Lady Hagnes Foker’s son
is here, sir. He’s been asleep in the coffee-room since he took his
dinner, and has just rung for his coffee, sir. And I think, p’raps, you
might like to git into conversation with him," the valet said, opening
the coffee-room door.
The Major entered; and there indeed was Mr. Foker, the only occupant of
the place. He was rubbing his eyes, and sate before a table rated with
empty decanters and relics of dessert. He had intended to go to the play
too, but sleep had overtaken him after a copious meal, and he had flung
up his legs on the bench, and indulged in a nap instead of the dramatic
amusement. The Major was meditating how to address the young man, but the
latter prevented him that trouble.
"Like to look at the evening paper, sir?" said Mr. Foker, who was always
communicative and affable; and he took up the Globe from his table, and
offered it to the new-comer.
"I am very much obliged to you," said the Major, with a grateful bow and
smile. "If I don’t mistake the family likeness, I have the pleasure ofspeaking to Mr. Henry Foker, Lady Agnes Foker’s son. I have the happiness
to name her ladyship among my acquaintances--and you bear, sir, a
Rosherville face."
"Hullo! I beg your pardon," Mr. Foker said, "I took you,"--he was going
to say--"I took you for a commercial gent." But he stopped that phrase.
"To whom have I the pleasure of speaking?" he added.
"To a relative of a friend and schoolfellow of yours--Arthur Pendennis,
my nephew, who has often spoken to me about you in terms of great regard.
I am Major Pendennis, of whom you may have heard him speak. May I take my
soda-water at your table? I have had the pleasure of sitting at your
grandfather’s."
"Sir, you do me proud," said Mr. Foker, with much courtesy. "And so you
are Arthur Pendennis’s uncle, are you?"
"And guardian," added the Major.
"He’s as good a fellow as ever stepped, sir," said Mr. Foker.
"I am glad you think so."
"And clever, too--I was always a stupid chap, I was--but you see, sir, I
know ’em when they are clever, and like ’em of that sort."
"You show your taste and your modesty, too," said the Major. "I have
heard Arthur repeatedly speak of you, and he said your talents were very
good."
"I’m not good at the books," Mr. Foker said, wagging his head--"never
could manage that--Pendennis could--he used to do half the chaps’ verses
--and yet"--the young gentleman broke out, "you are his guardian; and I
hope you will pardon me for saying that I think he’s what we call flat,"
the candid young gentleman said.
The Major found himself on the instant in the midst of a most interesting
and confidential conversation. "And how is Arthur a flat?" he asked, with
a smile.
"You know," Foker answered, winking at him--he would have winked at the
Duke of Wellington with just as little scruple, for he was in that state
of absence, candour, and fearlessness which a man sometimes possesses
after drinking a couple of bottles of wine--"You know Arthur’s a flat,--
about women I mean."
"He is not the first of us, my dear Mr. Harry," answered the Major. "I
have heard something of this--but pray tell me more."
"Why, sir, you see--it’s partly my fault. He went to the play one night--
for you see I’m down here readin’ for my little go during the Long, only
I come over from Baymouth pretty often in my drag--well, sir, we went to
the play, and Pen was struck all of a heap with Miss Fotheringay--Costigan her real name is--an uncommon fine gal she is too; and the next
morning I introduced him to the General, as we call her father--a regular
old scamp and such a boy for the whisky-and-water!--and he’s gone on
being intimate there. And he’s fallen in love with her--and I’m blessed
if he hasn’t proposed to her," Foker said, slapping his hand on the
table, until all the dessert began to jingle.
"What! you know it too?" asked the Major.
"Know it! don’t I? and many more too. We were talking about it at mess,
yesterday, and chaffing Derby Oaks--until he was as mad as a hatter. Know
Sir Derby Oaks? We dined together, and he went to the play: we were
standing at the door smoking, I remember, when you passed in to dinner."
"I remember Sir Thomas Oaks, his father, before he was a Baronet or a
Knight; he lived in Cavendish-square, and was physician to Queen
Charlotte."
"The young one is making the money spin, I can tell you," Mr. Foker said.
"And is Sir Derby Oaks," the Major said, with great delight and anxiety,
"another soupirant?"
"Another what?" inquired Mr. Foker.
"Another admirer of Miss Fotheringay?"
"Lord bless you! we call him Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays, and Pen
Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Saturdays. But mind you, nothing wrong! No, no!
Miss F. is a deal too wide-awake for that, Major Pendennis. She plays one
off against the other. What you call two strings to her bow."
"I think you seem tolerably wide-awake, too, Mr. Foker, Pendennis said,
laughing.
"Pretty well, thank you, sir--how are you?" Foker replied, imperturbably.
"I’m not clever, p’raps: but I am rather downy; and partial friends say I
know what’s o’clock tolerably well. Can I tell you the time of day in any
way?"
"Upon my word," the Major answered, quite delighted, "I think you may be
of very great service to me. You are a young man of the world, and with
such one likes to deal. And as such I need not inform you that our family
is by no means delighted at this absurd intrigue in which Arthur is
engaged."
"I should rather think not," said Mr. Foker. "Connexion not eligible. Too
much beer drunk on the premises. No Irish need apply. That I take to be
your meaning."
The Major said it was, exactly; though in truth he did not quite
understand what Mr. Foker’s meaning was: and he proceeded to examine his
new acquaintance regarding the amiable family into which his nephewproposed to enter, and soon got from the candid witness a number of
particulars regarding the House of Costigan.
We must do Mr. Foker the justice to say that he spoke most favourably of
Mr. and Miss Costigan’s moral character. "You see," said he, "I think the
General is fond of the jovial bowl, and if I wanted to be very certain of
my money, it isn’t in his pocket I’d invest it--but he has always kept a
watchful eye on his daughter, and neither he nor she will stand anything
but what’s honourable. Pen’s attentions to her are talked about in the
whole Company, and I hear all about them from a young lady who used to be
very intimate with her, and with whose family I sometimes take tea in a
friendly way. Miss Rouncy says, Sir Derby Oaks has been hanging about
Miss Fotheringay ever since his regiment has been down here; but Pen has
come in and cut him out lately, which has made the Baronet so mad, that
he has been very near on the point of proposing too. Wish he would; and
you’d see which of the two Miss Fotheringay would jump at."
"I thought as much," the Major said. "You give me a great deal of
pleasure, Mr. Foker. I wish I could have seen you before."
"Didn’t like to put in my oar," replied the other. "Don’t speak till I’m
asked, when, if there’s no objections, I speak pretty freely. Heard your
man had been hankering about my servant--didn’t know myself what was
going on until Miss Fotheringay and Miss Rouncy had the row about the
ostrich feathers, when Miss R. told me everything."
"Miss Rouncy, I gather, was the confidante of the other."
"Confidant? I believe you. Why, she’s twice as clever a girl as
Fotheringay, and literary and that, while Miss Foth can’t do much more
than read."
"She can write," said the Major, remembering Pen’s breast-pocket.
Foker broke out into a sardonic "He, he! Rouncy writes her letters," he
said; "every one of ’em; and since they’ve quarrelled, she don’t know how
the deuce to get on. Miss Rouncy is an uncommon pretty hand, whereas the
old one makes dreadful work of the writing and spelling when Bows ain’t
by. Rouncy’s been settin’ her copies lately--she writes a beautiful hand,
Rouncy does."
"I suppose you know it pretty well," said the Major archly upon which Mr.
Foker winked at him again.
"I would give a great deal to have a specimen of her hand-writing,"
continued Major Pendennis, "I dare say you could give me one."
"No, no, that would be too bad," Foker replied. "Perhaps I oughtn’t to
have said as much as I have. Miss F.’s writin’ ain’t so very bad, I dare
say; only she got Miss R. to write the first letter, and has gone on ever
since. But you mark my word, that till they are friends again the letters
will stop.""I hope they will never be reconciled," the Major said with great
sincerity; "and I can’t tell you how delighted I am to have had the good
fortune of making your acquaintance. You must feel, my dear sir, as a man
of the world, how fatal to my nephew’s prospects in life is this step
which he contemplates, and how eager we all must be to free him from this
absurd engagement."
"He has come out uncommon strong," said Mr. Foker; "I have seen his
verses; Rouncy copied ’em. And I said to myself when I saw ’em, ’Catch me
writin’ verses to a woman,--that’s all.’"
"He has made a fool of himself, as many a good fellow has before him. How
can we make him see his folly, and cure it? I am sure you will give us
what aid you can in extricating a generous young man from such a pair of
schemers as this father and daughter seem to be. Love on the lady’s side
is out of the question."
"Love, indeed!" Foker said. "If Pen hadn’t two thousand a year when he
came of age----"
"If Pen hadn’t what?" cried out the Major in astonishment.
"Two thousand a year: hasn’t he got two thousand a year?--the General
says he has."
"My dear friend," shrieked out the Major, with an eagerness which this
gentleman rarely showed, "thank you!--thank you!--I begin to see now.--
Two thousand a year! Why, his mother has but five hundred a year in the
world.--She is likely to live to eighty, and Arthur has not a shilling
but what she can allow him."
"What! he ain’t rich then?" Foker asked.
"Upon my honour he has no more than what I say."
"And you ain’t going to leave him anything?"
The Major had sunk every shilling he could scrape together on an annuity,
and of course was going to leave Pen nothing; but he did not tell Foker
this. "How much do you think a Major on half-pay can save?" he asked. "If
these people have been looking at him as a fortune, they are utterly
mistaken-and-and you have made me the happiest man in the world."
"Sir to you," said Mr. Foker, politely, and when they parted for the
night they shook hands with the greatest cordiality; the younger
gentleman promising the elder not to leave Chatteris without a further
conversation in the morning. And as the Major went up to his room, and
Mr. Foker smoked his cigar against the door pillars of the George, Pen,
very likely, ten miles off; was lying in bed kissing the letter from his
Emily.
The next morning, before Mr. Foker drove off in his drag, the insinuating
Major had actually got a letter of Miss Rouncy’s in his own pocket-book.Let it be a lesson to women how they write. And in very high spirits
Major Pendennis went to call upon Doctor Portman at the Deanery, and told
him what happy discoveries he had made on the previous night. As they
sate in confidential conversation in the Dean’s oak breakfast-parlour
they could look across the lawn and see Captain Costigan’s window, at
which poor Pen had been only too visible some three weeks since. The
Doctor was most indignant against Mrs. Creed, the landlady, for her
duplicity, in concealing Sir Derby Oaks’s constant visits to her lodgers,
and threatened to excommunicate her out of the Cathedral. But the wary
Major thought that all things were for the best; and, having taken
counsel with himself over night, felt himself quite strong enough to go
and face Captain Costigan.
"I’m going to fight the dragon," he said, with a laugh, to Doctor
Portman.
"And I shrive you, sir, and bid good fortune go with you," answered the
Doctor. Perhaps he and Mrs. Portman and Miss Myra, as they sate with
their friend, the Dean’s lady, in her drawing-room, looked up more than
once at the enemy’s window to see if they could perceive any signs of the
combat.
The Major walked round, according to the directions given him, and soon
found Mrs. Creed’s little door. He passed it, and as he ascended to
Captain Costigan’s apartment, he could hear a stamping of feet, and a
great shouting of "Ha, ha!" within.
"It’s Sir Derby Oaks taking his fencing lesson," said the child, who
piloted Major Pendennis. "He takes it Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays."
The Major knocked, and at length a tall gentleman came forth, with a foil
and mask in one hand, and a fencing glove on the other.
Pendennis made him a deferential bow. "I believe I have the honour of
speaking to Captain Costigan--My name is Major Pendennis."
The Captain brought his weapon up to the salute, and said, "Major, the
honer is moine; I’m deloighted to see ye."
CHAPTER XI
Negotiation
The Major and Captain Costigan were old soldiers and accustomed to face
the enemy, so we may presume that they retained their presence of mind
perfectly; but the rest of the party assembled in Cos’s sitting-room
were, perhaps, a little flurried at Pendennis’s apparition. Miss
Fotheringay’s slow heart began to beat no doubt, for her cheek flushed up
with a great healthy blush, as Lieutenant Sir Derby Oaks looked at herwith a scowl. The little crooked old man in the window-seat, who had been
witnessing the fencing-match between the two gentlemen (whose stamping
and jumping had been such as to cause him to give up all attempts to
continue writing the theatre music, in the copying of which he had been
engaged) looked up eagerly towards the new-comer as the Major of the
well-blacked boots entered the apartment distributing the most graceful
bows to everybody present.
"Me daughter--me friend, Mr. Bows--me gallant young pupil and friend, I
may call ’um, Sir Derby Oaks," said Costigan, splendidly waving his hand,
and pointing each of these individuals to the Major’s attention. "In one
moment, Meejor, I’m your humble servant," and to dash into the little
adjoining chamber where he slept, to give a twist to his lank hair with
his hair-brush (a wonderful and ancient piece), to tear off his old stock
and put on a new one which Emily had constructed for him, and to assume a
handsome clean collar, and the new coat which had been ordered upon the
occasion of Miss Fotheringay’s benefit, was with the still active
Costigan the work of a minute.
After him Sir Derby entered, and presently emerged from the same
apartment, where he also cased himself in his little shell-jacket, which
fitted tightly upon the young officer’s big person; and which he, and
Miss Fotheringay, and poor Pen too, perhaps, admired prodigiously.
Meanwhile conversation was engaged between the actress and the new-comer;
and the usual remarks about the weather had been interchanged before
Costigan re-entered in his new ’Shoot,’ as he called it.
"I needn’t apologoise to ye, Meejor," he said, in his richest and most
courteous manner, "for receiving ye in me shirt-sleeves."
"An old soldier can’t be better employed than in teaching a young one the
use of his sword," answered the Major, gallantly. "I remember in old
times hearing that you could use yours pretty well, Captain Costigan."
"What, ye’ve heard of Jack Costigan, Major," said the other, greatly.
The Major had, indeed; he had pumped his nephew concerning his new
friend, the Irish officer; and whether he had no other knowledge of the
Captain than what he had thus gained, or whether he actually remembered
him, we cannot say. But Major Pendennis was a person of honour and
undoubted veracity, and said that he perfectly well recollected meeting
Mr. Costigan, and hearing him sing at Sir Richard Strachan’s table at
Walcheren.
At this information, and the bland and cordial manner in which it was
conveyed, Bows looked up, entirely puzzled. "But we will talk of these
matters another time," the Major continued, perhaps not wishing to commit
himself; "it is to Miss Fotheringay that I came to pay my respects
to-day;" and he performed another bow for her, so courtly and gracious,
that if she had been a duchess he could not have made it more handsome.
"I had heard of your performances from my nephew, madam," the Major said,"who raves about you, as I believe you know pretty well. But Arthur is
but a boy, and a wild enthusiastic young fellow, whose opinions one must
not take au pied de la lettre; and I confess I was anxious to judge for
myself. Permit me to say your performance delighted and astonished me. I
have seen our best actresses, and, on my word, I think you surpass them
all. You are as majestic as Mrs. Siddons."
"Faith, I always said so," Costigan said, winking at his daughter;
"Major, take a chair." Milly rose at this hint, took an uuripped satin
garment off the only vacant seat, and brought the latter to Major
Pendennis with one of her finest curtseys.
"You are as pathetic as Miss O’Neill," he continued, bowing and seating
himself; "your snatches of song reminded me of Mrs. Jordan in her best
time, when we were young men, Captain Costigan; and your manner reminded
me of Mars. Did you ever see the Mars, Miss Fotheringay?"
"There was two Mahers in Crow Street," remarked Miss Emily; "Fanny was
well enough, but Biddy was no great things."
"Sure, the Major means the god of war, Milly, my dear," interposed the
parent.
"It is not that Mars I meant, though Venus, I suppose, may be pardoned
for thinking about him," the Major replied with a smile directed in full
to Sir Derby Oaks, who now re-entered in his shell-jacket; but the lady
did not understand the words of which he made use, nor did the compliment
at all pacify Sir Derby, who, probably, did not understand it either, and
at any rate received it with great sulkiness and stiffness, scowling
uneasily at Miss Fotheringay, with an expression which seemed to ask what
the deuce does this man here?
Major Pendennis was not in the least annoyed by the gentleman’s
ill-humour. On the contrary, it delighted him. "So," thought he, "a rival
is in the field;" and he offered up vows that Sir Derby might be, not
only a rival, but a winner too, in this love-match in which he and Pen
were engaged.
"I fear I interrupted your fencing lesson; but my stay in Chatteris
is very short, and I was anxious to make myself known to my old
fellow-campaigner Captain Costigan, and to see a lady nearer who had
charmed me so much from the stage. I was not the only man epris last
night, Miss Fotheringay (if I must call you so, though your own family
name is a very ancient and noble one). There was a reverend friend of
mine, who went home in raptures with Ophelia; and I saw Sir Derby Oaks
fling a bouquet which no actress ever merited better. I should have
brought one myself, had I known what I was going to see. Are not those
the very flowers in a glass of water on the mantelpiece yonder?"
"I am very fond of flowers," said Miss Fotheringay, with a languishing
ogle at Sir Derby Oaks--but the Baronet still scowled sulkily.
"Sweets to the sweet--isn’t that the expression of the play?" Mr.Pendennis asked, bent upon being good-humoured.
"’Pon my life, I don’t know. Very likely it is. I ain’t much of a
literary man," answered Sir Derby.
"Is it possible?" the Major continued, with an air of surprise. You don’t
inherit your father’s love of letters, then, Sir Derby? He was a
remarkably fine scholar, and I had the honour of knowing him very well."
"Indeed," said the other, and gave a sulky wag of his head.
"He saved my life," continued Pendennis.
"Did he now?" cried Miss Fotheringay, rolling her eyes first upon the
Major with surprise, then towards Sir Derby with gratitude--but the
latter was proof against those glances: and far from appearing to be
pleased that the Apothecary, his father, should have saved Major
Pendennis’s life, the young man actually looked as if he wished the event
had turned the other way.
"My father, I believe, was a very good doctor," the young gentleman said
by way of reply. "I’m not in that line myself. I wish you good morning,
sir. I’ve got an appointment--Cos, bye-bye--Miss Fotheringay, good
morning." And, in spite of the young lady’s imploring looks and appealing
smiles, the Dragoon bowed stiffly out of the room, and the clatter of his
sabre was heard as he strode down the creaking stair; and the angry tones
of his voice as he cursed little Tom Creed, who was disporting in the
passage, and whose peg-top Sir Derby kicked away with an oath into the
street.
The Major did not smile in the least, though he had every reason to be
amused. "Monstrous handsome young man that--as fine a looking soldier as
ever I saw," he said to Costigan.
"A credit to the army and to human nature in general," answered Costigan.
"A young man of refoined manners, polite affabilitee, and princely
fortune. His table is sumptuous: he’s adawr’d in the regiment: and he
rides sixteen stone."
"A perfect champion," said the Major, laughing. "I have no doubt all the
ladies admire him."
"He’s very well, in spite of his weight, now he’s young," said Milly;
"but he’s no conversation."
"He’s best on horseback," Mr. Bows said; on which Milly replied, that the
Baronet had ridden third in the steeple-chase on his horse Tareaways, and
the Major began to comprehend that the young lady herself was not of a
particular genius, and to wonder how she should be so stupid and act so
well.
Costigan, with Irish hospitality, of course pressed refreshment upon his
guest: and the Major, who was no more hungry than you are after a LordMayor’s dinner, declared that he should like a biscuit and a glass of
wine above all things, as he felt quite faint from long fasting--but he
knew that to receive small kindnesses flatters the donors very much, and
that people must needs grow well disposed towards you as they give you
their hospitality.
"Some of the old Madara, Milly, love," Costigan said, winking to his
child--and that lady, turning to her father a glance of intelligence,
went out of the room, and down the stair, where she softly summoned her
little emissary Master Tommy Creed: and giving him a piece of money,
ordered him to go buy a pint of Madara wine at the Grapes, and
sixpennyworth of sorted biscuits at the baker’s, and to return in a
hurry, when he might have two biscuits for himself.
Whilst Tommy Creed was gone on this errand, Miss Costigan sate below with
Mrs. Creed, telling her landlady how Mr. Arthur Pendennis’s uncle, the
Major, was above-stairs; a nice, soft-spoken old gentleman; that butter
wouldn’t melt in his mouth: and how Sir Derby had gone out of the room in
a rage of jealousy, and thinking what must be done to pacify both of
them.
"She keeps the keys of the cellar, Major," said Mr. Costigan, as the girl
left the room.
"Upon my word you have a very beautiful butler," answered Pendennis,
gallantly, "and I don’t wonder at the young fellows raving about her.
When we were of their age, Captain Costigan, I think plainer women would
have done our business."
"Faith, and ye may say that, sir--and lucky is the man who gets her. Ask
me friend Bob Bows here whether Miss Fotheringay’s moind is not even
shuparior to her person, and whether she does not possess a cultiveated
intellect, a refoined understanding, and an emiable disposition?"
"O of course," said Mr. Bows, rather drily. "Here comes Hebe blushing
from the cellar. Don’t you think it is time to go to rehearsal, Miss
Hebe? You will be fined if you are later"--and he gave the young lady a
look, which intimated that they had much better leave the room and the
two elders together.
At this order Miss Hebe took up her bonnet and shawl, looking uncommonly
pretty, good-humoured, and smiling: and Bows gathered up his roll of
papers, and hobbled across the room for his hat and cane.
"Must you go?" said the Major. "Can’t you give us a few minutes more,
Miss Fotheringay? Before you leave us, permit an old fellow to shake you
by the hand, and believe that I am proud to have had the honour of making
your acquaintance, and am most sincerely anxious to be your friend."
Miss Fotheringay made a low curtsey at the conclusion of this gallant
speech, and the Major followed her retreating steps to the door, where he
squeezed her hand with the kindest and most paternal pressure. Bows was
puzzled with this exhibition of cordiality: "The lad’s relatives can’t bereally wanting to marry him to her," he thought--and so they departed.
"Now for it," thought Major Pendennis; and as for Mr. Costigan he
profited instantaneously by his daughter’s absence to drink up the rest
of the wine; and tossed off one bumper after another of the Madeira from
the Grapes, with an eager shaking hand. The Major came up to the table,
and took up his glass and drained it with a jovial smack. If it had been
Lord Steyne’s particular, and not public-house Cape, he could not have
appeared to relish it more.
"Capital Madeira, Captain Costigan," he said. "Where do you get it? I
drink the health of that charming creature in a bumper. Faith, Captain, I
don’t wonder that the men are wild about her. I never saw such eyes in my
life, or such a grand manner. I am sure she is as intellectual as she is
beautiful; and I have no doubt she’s as good as she is clever."
"A good girl, sir,--a good girl, sir," said the delighted father; "and I
pledge a toast to her with all my heart. Shall I send to the--to the
cellar for another pint? It’s handy by. No? Well, indeed sir, ye may say
she is a good girl, and the pride and glory of her father--honest old
Jack Costigan. The man who gets her will have a jew’l to a wife, sir; and
I drink his health, sir, and ye know who I mean, Major."
"I am not surprised at young or old falling in love with her," said the
Major, "and frankly must tell you, that though I was very angry with my
poor nephew Arthur, when I heard of the boy’s passion--now I have seen
the lady I can pardon him any extent of it. By George, I should like to
enter for the race myself, if I weren’t an old fellow and a poor one."
"And no better man, Major, I’m sure," cried Jack enraptured.
"Your friendship, sir, delights me. Your admiration for my girl brings
tears to me eyes--tears, sir--manlee tears--and when she leaves me humble
home for your own more splendid mansion, I hope she’ll keep a place for
her poor old father, poor old Jack Costigan."--The Captain suited the
action to the word, and his bloodshot eyes were suffused with water, as
he addressed the Major.
"Your sentiments do you honour," the other said. "But, Captain Costigan,
I can’t help smiling at one thing you have just said."
"And what’s that, sir?" asked Jack, who was at a too heroic and
sentimental pitch to descend from it. You were speaking about our
splendid mansion--my sister’s house, I mean.
"I mane the park and mansion of Arthur Pendennis, Esquire, of Fairoaks
Park, whom I hope to see a Mimber of Parliament for his native town of
Clavering, when he is of ege to take that responsible stetion," cried the
Captain with much dignity.
The Major smiled as he recognised a shaft of his own bow. It was he who
had set Pen upon the idea of sitting in Parliament for the neighbouring
borough--and the poor lad had evidently been bragging on the subject toCostigan and the lady of his affections. "Fairoaks Park, my dear sir," he
said. "Do you know our history? We are of excessively ancient family
certainly, but I began life with scarce enough money to purchase my
commission, and my eldest brother was a country apothecary: who made
every shilling he died possessed of out of his pestle and mortar."
"I have consented to waive that objection, sir," said Costigan
majestically, "in consideration of the known respectability of your
family."
"Curse your impudence," thought the Major; but he only smiled and bowed.
"The Costigans, too, have met with misfortunes; and our house of Castle
Costigan is by no manes what it was. I have known very honest men
apothecaries, sir, and there’s some in Dublin that has had the honour of
dining at the Lord Leftenant’s teeble."
"You are very kind to give us the benefit of your charity," the Major
continued: "but permit me to say that is not the question. You spoke just
now of my little nephew as heir of Fairoaks Park and I don’t know what
besides."
"Funded property, I’ve no doubt, Meejor, and something handsome
eventually from yourself."
"My good sir, I tell you the boy is the son of a country apothecary,"
cried out Major Pendennis; "and that when he comes of age he won’t have a
shilling."
"Pooh, Major, you’re laughing at me," said Mr. Costigan, "me young
friend, I make no doubt, is heir to two thousand pounds a year."
"Two thousand fiddlesticks! I beg your pardon, my dear sir; but has the
boy been humbugging you?--it is not his habit. Upon my word and honour,
as a gentleman and an executor to my brother’s will too, he left little
more than five hundred a year behind him."
"And with aconomy, a handsome sum of money too, sir," the Captain
answered. "Faith, I’ve known a man drink his clar’t, and drive his
coach-and-four on five hundred a year and strict aconomy, in Ireland,
sir. We’ll manage on it, sir--trust Jack Costigan for that."
"My dear Captain Costigan--I give you my word that my brother did not
leave a shilling to his son Arthur."
"Are ye joking with me, Meejor Pendennis?" cried Jack Costigan. "Are ye
thrifling with the feelings of a father and a gentleman?"
"I am telling you the honest truth," said Major Pendennis. "Every
shilling my brother had, he left to his widow: with a partial reversion,
it is true, to the boy. But she is a young woman, and may marry if he
offends her--or she may outlive him, for she comes of an uncommonly
long-lived family. And I ask you, as a gentleman and a man of the world,what allowance can my sister, Mrs. Pendennis, make to her son out of five
hundred a year, which is all her fortune,--that shall enable him to
maintain himself and your daughter in the rank befitting such an
accomplished young lady?"
"Am I to understand, sir, that the young gentleman, your nephew, and whom
I have fosthered and cherished as the son of me bosom, is an imposther
who has been thrifling with the affections of me beloved child?"
exclaimed the General, with an outbreak of wrath.--"Have you yourself
been working upon the feelings of the young man’s susceptible nature to
injuice him to break off an engagement, and with it me adored Emily’s
heart? Have a care, sir, how you thrifle with the honour of John
Costigan. If I thought any mortal man meant to do so, be heavens I’d have
his blood, sir--were he old or young."
"Mr. Costigan!" cried out the Major.
"Mr. Costigan can protect his own and his daughter’s honour, and will,
sir," said the other. "Look at that chest of dthrawers, it contains heaps
of letthers that that viper has addressed to that innocent child. There’s
promises there, sir, enough to fill a bandbox with; and when I have
dragged the scoundthrel before the Courts of Law, and shown up his
perjury and his dishonour, I have another remedy in yondther mahogany
case, sir, which shall set me right, sir, with any individual--ye mark me
words, Major Pendennis--with any individual who has counselled your
nephew to insult a soldier and a gentleman. What? Me daughter to be
jilted, and me grey hairs dishonoured by an apothecary’s son. By the laws
of Heaven, Sir, I should like to see the man that shall do it."
"I am to understand then that you threaten in the first place to publish
the letters of a boy of eighteen to a woman of eight-and-twenty: and
afterwards to do me the honour of calling me out," the Major said, still
with perfect coolness.
"You have described my intentions with perfect accuracy, Meejor
Pendennis," answered the Captain, as he pulled his ragged whiskers over
his chin.
"Well, well; these shall be the subjects of future arrangements, but
before we come to powder and ball, my good sir,--do have the kindness to
think with yourself in what earthly way I have injured you? I have told
you that my nephew is dependent upon his mother, who has scarcely more
than five hundred a year."
"I have my own opinion of the correctness of that assertion," said the
Captain.
"Will you go to my sister’s lawyers, Messrs. Tatham here, and satisfy
yourself?"
"I decline to meet those gentlemen," said the Captain, with rather a
disturbed air. "If it be as you say, I have been athrociously deceived by
some one, and on that person I’ll be revenged.""Is it my nephew?" cried the Major, starting up and putting on his hat.
"Did he ever tell you that his property was two thousand a year? If he
did, I’m mistaken in the boy. To tell lies has not been a habit in our
family, Mr. Costigan, and I don’t think my brother’s son has learned it
as yet. Try and consider whether you have not deceived yourself; or
adopted extravagant reports from hearsay--As for me, sir, you are at
liberty to understand that I am not afraid of all the Costigans in
Ireland, and know quite well how to defend myself against any threats
from any quarter. I come here as the boy’s guardian to protest against a
marriage, most absurd and unequal, that cannot but bring poverty and
misery with it: and in preventing it I conceive I am quite as much your
daughter’s friend (who I have no doubt is an honourable young lady) as
the friend of my own family: and prevent the marriage I will, sir, by
every means in my power. There, I have said my say, sir."
"But I have not said mine, Major Pendennis--and ye shall hear more from
me," Mr. Costigan said, with a look of tremendous severity.
"’Sdeath, sir, what do you mean?" the Major asked, turning round on the
threshold of the door, and looking the intrepid Costigan in the face.
"Ye said, in the coorse of conversation, that ye were at the George
Hotel, I think," Mr. Costigan said in a stately manner. "A friend shall
wait upon ye there before ye leave town, sir."
"Let him make haste, Mr. Costigan," cried out the Major, almost beside
himself with rage. "I wish you a good morning, sir." And Captain Costigan
bowed a magnificent bow of defiance to Major Pendennis over the
landing-place as the latter retreated down the stairs.
CHAPTER XII
In which a Shooting Match is proposed
Early mention has been made in this history of Mr. Garbetts, Principal
Tragedian, a promising and athletic young actor, of jovial habits and
irregular inclinations, between whom and Mr. Costigan there was a
considerable intimacy. They were the chief ornaments of the convivial
club held at the Magpie Hotel; they helped each other in various bill
transactions in which they had been engaged, with the mutual loan of each
other’s valuable signatures. They were friends, in fine: although Mr.
Garbetts seldom called at Costigan’s house, being disliked by Miss
Fotheringay, of whom in her turn Mrs. Garbetts was considerably jealous.
The truth is, that Garbetts had paid his court to Miss Fotheringay and
been refused by her, before he offered his hand to Mrs. G. Their history,
however, forms no part of our present scheme--suffice it, Mr. Garbetts
was called in by Captain Costigan immediately after his daughter and Mr.
Bows had quitted the house, as a friend proper to be consulted at theactual juncture. He was a large man, with a loud voice and fierce aspect,
who had the finest legs of the whole company, and could break a poker in
mere sport across his stalwart arm.
"Run, Tommy," said Mr. Costigan to the little messenger, "and fetch Mr.
Garbetts from his lodgings over the tripe shop, ye know, and tell ’em to
send two glasses of whisky-and-water, hot, from the Grapes." So Tommy
went his way; and presently Mr. Garbetts and the whisky came.
Captain Costigan did not disclose to him the whole of the previous
events, of which the reader is in possession; but, with the aid of the
spirits-and-water, he composed a letter of a threatening nature to Major
Pendennis’s address, in which he called upon that gentleman to offer no
hindrance to the marriage projected between Mr. Arthur Pendennis and his
daughter, Miss Fotheringay, and to fix an early day for its celebration:
or, in any other case, to give him the satisfaction which was usual
between gentlemen of honour. And should Major Pendennis be disinclined to
this alternative, the Captain hinted, that he would force him to accept
by the use of a horsewhip, which he should employ upon the Major’s
person. The precise terms of this letter we cannot give, for reasons
which shall be specified presently; but it was, no doubt, couched in the
Captain’s finest style, and sealed elaborately with the great silver seal
of the Costigans--the only bit of the family plate which the Captain
possessed.
Garbetts was despatched then with this message and letter; and bidding
Heaven bless ’um the General squeezed his ambassador’s hand, and saw him
depart. Then he took down his venerable and murderous duelling-pistols,
with flint locks, that had done the business of many a pretty fellow in
Dublin: and having examined these, and seen that they were in a
satisfactory condition, he brought from the drawer all Pen’s letters and
poems which he kept there, and which he always read before he permitted
his Emily to enjoy their perusal.
In a score of minutes Garbetts came back with an anxious and crestfallen
countenance.
"Ye’ve seen ’um?" the Captain said.
"Why, yes," said Garbetts.
"And when is it for?" asked Costigan, trying the lock of one of the
ancient pistols, and bringing it to a level with his oi--as he called
that bloodshot orb.
"When is what for?" asked Mr. Garbetts.
"The meeting, my dear fellow?"
"You don’t mean to say, you mean mortal combat, Captain," Garbetts said,
aghast.
"What the devil else do I mean, Garbetts?--I want to shoot that man thathas trajuiced me honor, or meself dthrop a victim on the sod."
"D--- if I carry challenges," Mr. Garbetts replied. "I’m a family man,
Captain, and will have nothing to do with pistols--take back your
letter;" and, to the surprise and indignation of Captain Costigan, his
emissary flung the letter down, with its great sprawling superscription
and blotched seal.
"Ye don’t mean to say ye saw ’um and didn’t give ’um the letter?" cried
out the Captain in a fury.
"I saw him, but I could not have speech with him, Captain," said Mr.
Garbetts.
"And why the devil not?" asked the other.
"There was one there I cared not to meet, nor would you," the tragedian
answered in a sepulchral voice. "The minion Tatham was there, Captain."
"The cowardly scoundthrel!" roared Costigan. "He’s frightened, and
already going to swear the peace against me."
"I’ll have nothing to do with the fighting, mark that," the tragedian
doggedly said, "and I wish I’d not seen Tatham neither, nor that bit
of----"
"Hold your tongue, Bob Acres. It’s my belief ye’re no better than a
coward," said Captain Costigan, quoting Sir Lucius O’Trigger, which
character he had performed with credit, both off and on the stage, and
after some more parley between the couple they separated in not very good
humour.
Their colloquy has been here condensed, as the reader knows the main
point upon which it turned. But the latter will now see how it is
impossible to give a correct account of the letter which the Captain
wrote to Major Pendennis, as it was never opened at all by that
gentleman.
When Miss Costigan came home from rehearsal, which she did in the company
of the faithful Mr. Bows, she found her father pacing up and down their
apartment in a great state of agitation, and in the midst of a powerful
odour of spirits-and-water, which, as it appeared, had not succeeded in
pacifying his disordered mind. The Pendennis papers were on the table
surrounding the empty goblets and now useless teaspoon which had served
to hold and mix the Captain’s liquor and his friend’s. As Emily entered
he seized her in his arms, and cried out, "Prepare yourself, me child, me
blessed child," in a voice of agony, and with eyes brimful of tears.
"Ye’re tipsy again, Papa," Miss Fotheringay said, pushing back her sire.
"Ye promised me ye wouldn’t take spirits before dinner."
"It’s to forget me sorrows, me poor girl, that I’ve taken just a drop,"
cried the bereaved father--"it’s to drown me care that I drain the bowl.""Your care takes a deal of drowning, Captain dear," said Bows, mimicking
his friend’s accent; "what has happened? Has that soft-spoken gentleman
in the wig been vexing you?"
"The oily miscreant! I’ll have his blood!" roared Cos. Miss Milly, it
must be premised, had fled to her room out of his embrace, and was taking
off her bonnet and shawl there.
"I thought he meant mischief. He was so uncommon civil," the other said.
"What has he come to say?"
"O Bows! He has overwhellum’d me," the Captain said. "There’s a hellish
conspiracy on foot against me poor girl; and it’s me opinion that both
them Pendennises, nephew and uncle, is two infernal thrators and
scoundthrels, who should be conshumed from off the face of the earth."
"What is it? What has happened?" said Mr. Bows, growing rather excited.
Costigan then told him the Major’s statement that the young Pendennis had
not two thousand, nor two hundred pounds a year; and expressed his fury
that he should have permitted such an impostor to coax and wheedle his
innocent girl, and that he should have nourished such a viper in his own
personal bosom. "I have shaken the reptile from me, however," said
Costigan; "and as for his uncle, I’ll have such a revenge on that old
man, as shall make ’um rue the day he ever insulted a Costigan."
"What do you mean, General?" said Bows.
"I mean to have his life, Bows--his villanous, skulking life, my boy;"
and he rapped upon the battered old pistol-case in an ominous and savage
manner. Bows had often heard him appeal to that box of death, with which
he proposed to sacrifice his enemies; but the Captain did not tell him
that he had actually written and sent a challenge to Major Pendennis, and
Mr. Bows therefore rather disregarded the pistols in the present
instance.
At this juncture Miss Fotheringay returned to the common sitting-room
from her private apartment, looking perfectly healthy, happy, and
unconcerned, a striking and wholesome contrast to her father, who was in
a delirious tremor of grief, anger, and other agitation. She brought in a
pair of ex-white satin shoes with her, which she proposed to rub as clean
as might be with bread-crumb: intending to go mad with them upon next
Tuesday evening in Ophelia, in which character she was to reappear on
that night.
She looked at the papers on the table; stopped as if she was going to ask
a question, but thought better of it, and going to the cupboard, selected
an eligible piece of bread wherewith she might operate on the satin
slippers: and afterwards coming back to the table, seated herself there
commodiously with the shoes, and then asked her father, in her honest,
Irish brogue, "What have ye got them letthers, and pothry, and stuff, of
Master Arthur’s out for, Pa? Sure ye don’t want to be reading over thatnonsense."
"O Emilee!" cried the Captain, "that boy whom I loved as the boy of mee
bosom is only a scoundthrel, and a deceiver, mee poor girl:" and he
looked in the most tragical way at Mr. Bows, opposite; who, in his turn,
gazed somewhat anxiously at Miss Costigan.
"He! pooh! Sure the poor lad’s as simple as a schoolboy," she said. "All
them children write verses and nonsense."
"He’s been acting the part of a viper to this fireside, and a traitor in
this familee," cried the Captain. "I tell ye he’s no better than an
impostor."
"What has the poor fellow done, Papa?" asked Emily.
"Done? He has deceived us in the most athrocious manner," Miss Emily’s
papa said. "He has thrifled with your affections, and outraged my own
fine feelings. He has represented himself as a man of property, and it
turruns out that he is no betther than a beggar. Haven’t I often told ye
he had two thousand a year? He’s a pauper, I tell ye, Miss Costigan; a
depindent upon the bountee of his mother; a good woman, who may marry
again, who’s likely to live for ever, and who has but five hundred a
year. How dar he ask ye to marry into a family which has not the means of
providing for ye? Ye’ve been grossly deceived and put upon, Milly, and
it’s my belief his old ruffian of an uncle in a wig is in the plot
against us."
"That soft old gentleman? What has he been doing, Papa?" continued Emily,
still imperturbable.
Costigan informed Milly, that when she was gone, Major Pendennis told him
in his double-faced Pall Mall polite manner, that young Arthur had no
fortune at all, that the Major had asked him (Costigan) to go to the
lawyers ("wherein he knew the scoundthrels have a bill of mine, and I
can’t meet them," the Captain parenthetically remarked), and see the
lad’s father’s will and finally, that an infernal swindle had been
practised upon him by the pair, and that he was resolved either on a
marriage, or on the blood of both of them.
Milly looked very grave and thoughtful, rubbing the white satin shoes.
"Sure, if he’s no money, there’s no use marrying him, Papa," she said
sententiously.
"Why did the villain say he was a man of prawpertee?" asked Costigan.
"The poor fellow always said he was poor," answered the girl. "’Twas you
would have it he was rich, Papa--and made me agree to take him."
"He should have been explicit and told us his income, Milly," answered
the father. "A young fellow who rides a blood mare, and makes presents of
shawls and bracelets, is an impostor if he has no money;--and as for his
uncle, bedad I’ll pull off his wig whenever I see ’um. Bows, here, shalltake a message to him and tell him so. Either it’s a marriage, or he
meets me in the field like a man, or I tweak ’um on the nose in front of
his hotel or in the gravel walks of Fairoaks Park before all the county,
bedad."
"Bedad, you may send somebody else with the message," said Bows,
laughing. "I’m a fiddler, not a fighting man, Captain."
"Pooh, you’ve no spirit, sir," roared the General. "I’ll be my own
second, if no one will stand by and see me injured. And I’ll take my case
of pistols and shoot ’um in the Coffee-room of the George."
"And so poor Arthur has no money?" sighed out Miss Costigan, rather
plaintively. "Poor lad, he was a good lad too: wild and talking nonsense,
with his verses and pothry and that, but a brave, generous boy, and
indeed I liked him--and he liked me too," she added, rather softly, and
rubbing away at the shoe.
"Why don’t you marry him if you like him so?" Mr. Bows said, rather
savagely. "He is not more than ten years younger than you are. His mother
may relent, and you might go and live and have enough at Fairoaks Park.
Why not go and be a lady? I could go on with the fiddle, and the General
live on his half-pay. Why don’t you marry him? You know he likes you."
"There’s others that likes me as well, Bows, that has no money and that’s
old enough," Miss Milly said sententiously.
"Yes, d--- it," said Bows, with a bitter curse--"that are old enough and
poor enough and fools enough for anything."
"There’s old fools, and young fools too. You’ve often said so you silly
man," the imperious beauty said, with a conscious glance at the old
gentleman. "If Pendennis has not enough money to live upon, it’s folly to
talk about marrying him: and that’s the long and short of it."
"And the boy?" said Mr. Bows. "By Jove! you throw a man away like an old
glove, Miss Costigan."
"I don’t know what you mean, Bows," said Miss Fotheringay, placidly,
rubbing the second shoe. "If he had had half of the two thousand a year
that Papa gave him, or the half of that, I would marry him. But what is
the good of taking on with a beggar? We’re poor enough already. There’s
no use in my going to live with an old lady that’s testy and cross,
maybe, and would grudge me every morsel of meat." (Sure, it’s near dinner
time, and Suky not laid the cloth yet.) "And then," added Miss Costigan
quite simply, "suppose there was a family?--why, Papa, we shouldn’t be as
well off as we are now."
"’Deed, then, you would not, Milly dear," answered the father.
"And there’s an end to all the fine talk about Mrs. Arthur Pendennis of
Fairoaks Park--the member of Parliament’s lady," said Milly, with a
laugh. "Pretty carriages and horses we should have to ride!--that youwere always talking about, Papa! But it’s always the same. If a man
looked at me, you fancied he was going to marry me; and if he had a good
coat, you fancied he was as rich as Crazes."
"--As Croesus," said Mr. Bows.
"Well, call ’um what ye like. But it’s a fact now that Papa has married
me these eight years a score of times. Wasn’t I to be my Lady Poldoody of
Oystherstown Castle? Then there was the Navy Captain at Portsmouth, and
the old surgeon at Norwich, and the Methodist preacher here last year,
and who knows how many more? Well, I bet a penny, with all your scheming,
I shall die Milly Costigan at last. So poor little Arthur has no money?
Stop and take dinner, Bows; we’ve a beautiful beef-steak pudding."
"I wonder whether she is on with Sir Derby Oaks," thought Bows, whose
eyes and thoughts were always watching her. "The dodges of women beat all
comprehension; and I am sure she wouldn’t let the lad off so easily, if
she had not some other scheme on hand."
It will have been perceived that Miss Fotheringay, though silent in
general, and by no means brilliant as a conversationist, where poetry,
literature, or the fine arts were concerned, could talk freely, and with
good sense, too, in her own family circle. She cannot justly be called a
romantic person: nor were her literary acquirement great: she never
opened a Shakspeare from the day she left the stage, nor, indeed,
understood it during all the time she adorned the boards: but about a
pudding, a piece of needle-work, or her own domestic affairs, she was as
good a judge as could be found; and not being misled by a strong
imagination or a passionate temper, was better enabled to keep her
judgment cool. When, over their dinner, Costigan tried to convince
himself and the company, that the Major’s statement regarding Pen’s
finances was unworthy of credit, and a mere ruse upon the old hypocrite’s
part so as to induce them, on their side, to break off the match, Miss
Milly would not, for a moment, admit the possibility of deceit on the
side of the adversary: and pointed out clearly that it was her father who
had deceived himself, and not poor little Pen who had tried to take them
in. As for that poor lad, she said she pitied him with all her heart. And
she ate an exceedingly good dinner; to the admiration of Mr. Bows, who
had a remarkable regard and contempt for this woman, during and after
which repast, the party devised upon the best means of bringing this
love-matter to a close. As for Costigan, his idea of tweaking the Major’s
nose vanished with his supply of after-dinner whisky-and-water; and he
was submissive to his daughter, and ready for any plan on which she might
decide, in order to meet the crisis which she saw was at hand.
The Captain, who, as long as he had a notion that he was wronged, was
eager to face and demolish both Pen and his uncle, perhaps shrank from
the idea of meeting the former, and asked "what the juice they were to
say to the lad if he remained steady to his engagement, and they broke
from theirs?" "What? don’t you know how to throw a man over?" said Bows;
"ask a woman to tell you?" and Miss Fotheringay showed how this feat was
to be done simply enough--nothing was more easy. "Papa writes to Arthur
to know what settlements he proposes to make in event of a marriage; andasks what his means are. Arthur writes back and says what he’s got, and
you’ll find it’s as the Major says, I’ll go bail. Then papa writes, and
says it’s not enough, and the match had best be at an end."
"And, of course, you enclose a parting line, in which you say you will
always regard him as a brother," said Mr. Bows, eyeing her in his
scornful way.
"Of course, and so I shall," answered Miss Fotheringay. "He’s a most
worthy young man, I’m sure. I’ll thank ye hand me the salt. Them filberts
is beautiful."
"And there will be no noses pulled, Cos, my boy? I’m sorry you’re
baulked," said Mr. Bows.
"Dad, I suppose not," said Cos, rubbing his own.--"What’ll ye do about
them letters, and verses, and pomes, Milly, darling?--Ye must send ’em
back."
"Wigsby would give a hundred pound for ’em," Bows said, with a sneer.
"’Deed, then, he would," said Captain Costigan, who was easily led.
"Papa!" said Miss Milly.--"Ye wouldn’t be for not sending the poor boy
his letters back? Them letters and pomes is mine. They were very long,
and full of all sorts of nonsense, and Latin, and things I couldn’t
understand the half of; indeed I’ve not read ’em all; but we’ll send ’em
back to him when the proper time comes." And going to a drawer, Miss
Fotheringay took out from it a number of the County Chronicle and
Chatteris Champion, in which Pen had written a copy of flaming verses
celebrating her appearance in the character of Imogen, and putting by the
leaf upon which the poem appeared (for, like ladies of her profession,
she kept the favourable printed notices of her performances), she wrapped
up Pen’s letters, poems, passions, and fancies, and tied them with a
piece of string neatly, as she would a parcel of sugar.
Nor was she in the least moved while performing this act. What hours the
boy had passed over those papers! What love and longing: what generous
faith and manly devotion--what watchful nights and lonely fevers might
they tell of! She tied them up like so much grocery, and sate down and
made tea afterwards with a perfectly placid and contented heart: while
Pen was yearning after her ten miles off: and hugging her image to his
soul.
CHAPTER XIII
A Crisis
Meanwhile they were wondering at Fairoaks that the Major had notreturned. Dr. Portman and his lady, on their way home to Clavering,
stopped at Helen’s lodge-gate, with a brief note for her from Major
Pendennis, in which he said he should remain at Chatteris another day,
being anxious to have some talk with Messrs. Tatham, the lawyers, whom he
would meet that afternoon; but no mention was made of the transaction in
which the writer had been engaged during the morning. Indeed the note was
written at the pause after the first part of the engagement, and when the
Major had decidedly had the worst of the battle.
Pen did not care somehow to go into the town whilst his uncle was there.
He did not like to have to fancy that his guardian might be spying at him
from that abominable Dean’s grass-plat, whilst he was making love in Miss
Costigan’s drawing-room; and the pleasures of a walk (a delight which he
was very rarely permitted to enjoy) would have been spoiled if he had met
the man of the polished boots on that occasion. His modest love could not
show in public by any outward signs, except the eyes (with which the poor
fellow ogled and gazed violently to be sure), but it was dumb in the
presence of third parties; and so much the better, for of all the talk
which takes place in this world, that of love-makers is surely, to the
uninitiated, the most silly. It is the vocabulary without the key; it is
the lamp without the flame. Let the respected reader look or think over
some old love-letters that he (or she) has had and forgotten, and try
them over again. How blank and meaningless they seem! What glamour of
infatuation was it which made that nonsense beautiful? One wonders that
such puling and trash could ever have made one happy. And yet there were
dates when you kissed those silly letters with rapture--lived upon six
absurd lines for a week, and until the reactionary period came, when you
were restless and miserable until you got a fresh supply of folly.
That is why we decline to publish any of the letters and verses which Mr.
Pen wrote at this period of his life, out of mere regard for the young
fellow’s character. They are too spooney and wild. Young ladies ought not
to be called upon to read them in cold blood. Bide your time, young
women; perhaps you will get and write them on your own account soon.
Meanwhile we will respect Mr. Pen’s first outpourings, and keep them tied
up in the newspapers with Miss Fotheringay’s string, and sealed with
Captain Costigan’s great silver seal.
The Major came away from his interview with Captain Costigan in a state
of such concentrated fury as rendered him terrible to approach! "The
impudent bog-trotting scamp," he thought, "dare to threaten me! Dare to
talk of permitting his damned Costigans to marry with the Pendennises!
Send me a challenge! If the fellow can get anything in the shape of a
gentleman to carry it, I have the greatest mind in life not to baulk
him.--Psha! what would people say if I were to go out with a tipsy
mountebank, about a row with an actress in a barn!" So when the Major saw
Dr. Portman, who asked anxiously regarding the issue of his battle with
the dragon, Mr. Pendennis did not care to inform the divine of the
General’s insolent behaviour, but stated that the affair was a very ugly
and disagreeable one, and that it was by no means over yet.
He enjoined Doctor and Mrs. Portman to say nothing about the business at
Fairoaks; whither he contented himself with despatching the note we have